## Efficient Deterministic Replay of Multithreaded Programs Based on Efficient Tracking of Cross-Thread Dependences ∗

#### Ohio State CSE Technical Report OSU-CISRC-12/14-TR20 (December 2014)

#### Michael D. Bond† Milind Kulkarni‡ Man Cao† Meisam Fathi Salmi† Jipeng Huang†

† Ohio State University ‡ Purdue University

mikebond@cse.ohio-state.edu, milind@purdue.edu, { caoma,fathi,huangjip} @cse.ohio-state.edu

Abstract Shared-memory parallel programs are inherently nondeter ministic, making it difficult to diagnose rare bugs and to achieve deterministic execution, e.g., for replication. Exist ing multithreaded record & replay approaches have serious limitations such as relying on custom hardware or slowing programs by an order of magnitude. This paper introduces an approach for multithreaded re cord & replay based on tracking and reproducing shared memory dependences accurately and efficiently. We ex tend prior work that introduces an efficient dependence recorder, by developing a new analysis for replaying de pendences. To demonstrate multithreaded record & replay, we make substantial modifications to a Java virtual ma chine to control sources of nondeterminism in the JVM that affect application-level determinism such as garbage collection and class loading. We also introduce a research methodology that enables us to demonstrate replay in the in herently nondeterministic JVM. Overall the performance of both recorded and replayed executions compares favorably with existing software-based record & replay approaches.

1. Introduction Shared-memory programs are inherently nondeterministic because memory accesses interleave in different ways. Non determinism makes it difficult to diagnose production-time errors and to execute replicated multithreaded processes. Researchers have proposed record & replay to address this challenge [2, 17, 21–23, 25–27, 29, 32, 35, 36, 38, 40– 42]. One execution records enough information about thread interleavings so that another execution can replay the same thread interleavings faithfully, thus achieving the same ex ecution result (assuming other sources of nondeterminism, such as inputs and I/O, are made deterministic). Record & replay can support offline replay, online replay, or both. Of fline replay supports replaying a recorded execution at a later time, enabling debugging of production-time errors. On-∗ This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grants CSR-1218695, CAREER-1253703, and CCF 1421612.

line replay executes the replayed run concurrently with the recorded run, allowing multiple instances of a process to run simultaneously and deterministically, enabling replication based fault tolerance [11] and distribution of dynamic anal ysis among multiple execution instances [14, 33]. From a performance perspective, record & replay is straightforward for single-threaded code: sources of nonde terminism, such as I/O, time, and other system-level effects, are infrequent enough that recording and replaying them adds low overhead. However, making record & replay ef ficient for multithreaded, shared-memory programs is con siderably more challenging because many program points might be involved in nondeterministic interactions between threads. Threads interleave nondeterministically at so-called high-level races (races on synchronization operations) and data races (races on ordinary loads and stores). While syn chronization operations tend to be infrequent enough that they can be recorded and replayed efficiently (e.g., [38, 40]), many loads and stores can potentially be involved in data races, making it expensive to capture thread interactions ac curately. Existing work on record & replay either incurs high overhead to track cross-thread dependences [25, 26], relies on speculation and extra cores [27, 40], supports online or offline replay but not both [2, 23, 27, 35, 41], or relies on custom hardware [21, 22, 29, 32, 42]. Prior work called Octet introduces an efficient way to track cross-thread dependences [9]. However, that work does not describe nor demonstrate how to support replaying de pendences. Replaying dependences is challenging for two reasons. (1) It is not straightforward how to replay depen dences based on recorded information [9]. (2) Demonstrat ing REPLAY is challenging, particularly in a managed lan guage virtual machine (VM) that has many sources of non determinism that affect application determinism. This paper makes two main contributions. (1) We intro duce an approach for replaying dependences recorded by prior work’s dependence recorder [9]. (2) We modify a JVM and introduce a new methodology in order to control sources of nondeterminism other than memory access interleavings.

These contributions demonstrate a new record & replay approach that targets commodity systems, supports online and offline replay, and adds lower overhead than competing approaches (i.e., approaches that handle racy programs and support both online and offline replay). Our record & replay approach introduces two dynamic analyses called RECORD and REPLAY. RECORD identifies and records dependences using prior work’s approach [9]. REPLAY executes the program in parallel, enforcing the cross-thread data dependences recorded by RECORD. RE PLAY necessarily elides program synchronization opera tions, which would otherwise conflict nondeterministically with the recorded cross-threaded data dependences. We have implemented RECORD and REPLAY in a high performance Java virtual machine. In order to demonstrate REPLAY, we have (i) implemented novel approaches for controlling sources of nondeterminism in the JVM and (ii) introduced a research methodology that helps limit nonde terminism. While this support for determinism makes the ap proach unsuitable for most production use, it is not an inher ent limitation of our approach. The implementation currently supports only offline replay, but the approach is suitable for providing both offline and online replay. Because REPLAY elides synchronization and enforces the same dependences as RECORD, REPLAY is often faster than RECORD. Overall, RECORD and REPLAY add lower over head than competing approaches that also support online and offline replay in commodity systems.

2. Recording Cross-Thread Dependences This section presents a dynamic analysis called RECORD that records happens-before edges that soundly imply all cross-thread dependences in an execution. RECORD builds on an existing dynamic analysis called Octet [9]. The Octet paper outlines and evaluates an approach for recording de pendences identified by Octet [9], but it does not provide an algorithm for recording dependences. 2.1 Tracking Cross-Thread Dependences Octet is a dynamic analysis that establishes happens-before relationships [24] that soundly imply all cross-thread de pendences: data dependences (write–read, read–write, and write–write dependences) involving two threads. Although Octet instruments all accesses, it achieves low overhead by making an optimistic tradeoff: an access not involved in cross-thread dependences can use cheap, unsynchronized in strumentation; but an access involved in cross-thread depen dences requires expensive coordination among threads. The Octet analysis identifies cross-thread dependences by tracking the “locality” state of each potentially shared object. 1 Before each program memory access, the analysis uses this state to determine if the access might be involved in a cross-thread dependence. An access that does not require a state change is definitely not involved in a cross-thread

1 This paper uses the term “object” to refer to any unit of shared memory.

dependence. Each object has one of the following states at any given time: WrExT: Write exclusive for thread T. T may read or write the object without changing the state. Newly allocated objects start in WrExT state, where T is the allocating thread. RdExT: Read exclusive for thread T. T may read but not write the object without changing the state. RdShc: Read shared. Any thread T may read the object with out changing the state, subject to an up-to-date counter T.rdShCount ≥ c (described shortly). When a thread attempts to access an object, Octet checks the object’s state and updates the object’s state if necessary to allow the access. Table 1 shows the state transition for each possible initial state and access type. Some accesses require no state transition (rows labeled “None”); these accesses are the common case in practice. Other accesses trigger a state change; these accesses may be involved in cross-thread dependences. When a program memory access triggers a state change, it requires either a conflicting, upgrading, or fence transition, described in the next section. The following pseudocode shows the instrumentation that Octet adds at each program load or store to track per-object states. The analysis metadata o.state represents the state for the object referenced by o. Octet adds the following code at each program store:

if (o. state != WrExT) { 
/∗ Slow path: change o.state & call Record hooks ∗ / 
} o. f = ...; // program store 

and at each program load:

if (!( o. state == WrExT || o. state == RdExT || (o. state == RdShc && T.rdShCount >= c))) { /∗ Slow path: change o.state & call Record hooks ∗ / } ... = o.f; // program load

As can be seen, Octet’s instrumentation is optimized for ac cesses that do not trigger a state change—these accesses take the instrumentation “fast path.” Other accesses trigger the “slow path,” which performs state transitions. Octet estab lishes happens-before edges for these transitions, which RE CORD identifies and records. Next we describe how these transitions work. 2.2 Recording Happens-Before Edges This section describes how Octet state transitions establish happens-before edges, and how RECORD hooks onto these transitions to identify and record happens-before edges in per-thread logs. Per-thread logs and dynamic program location. A happens before edge involves a source point on one thread and a sink point on another thread. Each thread T records information

Fast path/ Transition Old New RECORD records slow path type state Access state happens-before edge? Fast None

WrExT R or W by T Same RdExT R by T Same No RdShc R by T if T.rdShCount ≥ c Same

Slow

Conflicting

WrExT1 W by T2 WrExT2 Yes WrExT1 R by T2 RdExT2 RdExT1 W by T2 WrExT2 RdShc W by T WrExT Upgrading RdExT W by T WrExT No RdExT1 R by T2 RdShgRdShCtr Yes Fence RdShc R by T if T.rdShCount < c (T.rdShCount = c) Yes Table 1. Octet’s state transitions establish happens-before edges. The last column shows which happens-before edges RECORD records.

rd o 
(RdExT2) 
rd o 
(RdShc) 

rd p (RdShc+1)

rd p 
(fence) rd o 
(fence) 
rd o 
(none) 

### t i m eT1 T2 T3 T6T4 T5

wr o (WrExT1)

safe point

Figure 1. Example execution illustrating state transitions. in its per-thread log, T.log, to enable replaying the source or sink of a happens-before edge. RECORD and REPLAY need to agree on when events oc cur in program execution. They use dynamic program loca tion (DPL) to represent a dynamic program point uniquely. We represent DPL as (1) a static site (e.g., method and byte code index) and (2) a per-thread counter T.dynCtr incre mented on every loop back edge, method entry, and method return. Conflicting transitions. If an access to an object by a thread conflicts with the object’s state, the access’s instrumentation triggers a conflicting transition (middle rows of Table 1). In Figure 1, suppose thread T1 has previously written to an ob ject o, so o’s state is WrExT1. Before T2 performs a load from o, RECORD’s instrumentation triggers a conflicting transi tion. T2 cannot simply change o’s state—even if it uses synch ronization—since it might race with T1 continuing to per form unsynchronized accesses to o, potentially missing cross-thread dependences. To handle the conflicting tran sition correctly, T2 coordinates with T1 to ensure that T1 does not continue accessing o. (At a write to an object in RdShc state, a thread coordinates separately with every other thread.) Performing coordination establishes a happens before relationship that implies the dependence from T1’s last access of o to T2’s current load of o. T1 only responds to T2’s request when T1 is at a safe point: a point that is definitely not between an access and its corresponding in strumentation. If T1 is blocked (e.g., waiting for a lock or for a coordination response), then T2 coordinates with T1 “implicitly,” ensuring progress [9]. Figure 1 shows the happens-before edge that RECORD must capture: from a safe point on T1 to T2’s load. RECORD piggybacks on coordination in order to record the source and sink of this happens-before edge. T1’s safe point records the source of this happens-before edge simply by recording its current DPL, by executing the following pseudocode:

T.log. recordEvent(RESPONSE, currentSiteID, T.dynCtr);

where T is the current thread, and currentSiteID identifies the current static program location (method and bytecode index). T.log.recordEvent() records an event identifier (e.g., RESPONSE) and any other arguments in T’s file-system based log. To record the happens-before sink in Figure 1, T2 records its current DPL and the value of a counter T1.responses: the number of coordination responses that T1 has responded to so far (incremented by T1 at each response [9]). T2 executes the following pseudocode:

T.log. recordEvent(REQUEST, currentSiteID, T.dynCtr, 
sourceThread.responses); 
// Helps with recording upgrading transitions : 
if (isRead) 
T.numConflReads++; 

where sourceThread is the responding thread (T1 in Fig ure 1). The conditional increment of the per-thread counter T.numConflReads helps with recording upgrading transi tions, described next. Upgrading transitions. An upgrading transition expands the set of allowable accesses compared with accesses al lowed under the old state. In Figure 1, before T3 performs a read to o in the RdExT2 state, it upgrades o’s state to RdShc. The value c that is part of the new RdShc state is the cur rent value of a global counter gRdShCtr that each upgrading transition to RdSh increments atomically. Threads use this counter to determine whether they have already read an ob

ject in RdShc state—or some other object in another state RdShc0 where c’>c. On an upgrading transition to a RdSh state, such as the transition from RdExT2 to RdShc in Figure 1, RECORD must record two happens-before edges: 1. A happens-before edge from the DPL on T2 that changed the same object to RdExT2 state. This happens-before edge is needed in order to transitively capture the cross thread dependence from the last write (by T1 in this case) to T3’s read. Identifying this happens-before edge is dif ficult because the DPL on T2 that changed the object to RdExT2 is no longer known when T3’s upgrading transi tion happens. Instead, RECORD records a more conser vative happens-before edge: from T2’s last transition of any object to RdExT2. 2. A happens-before edge from the previous upgrade of any object to RdSh, i.e., from the upgrade to RdShc− 1 (not shown in the figure). This happens-before edge is needed to transitively capture all write–read dependences cap tured via fence transitions (described next). For exam ple, it is necessary to capture the happens-before edge be tween transitions to RdShc and RdShc+1 in order to tran sitively capture the dependence from T1’s write of o to T5’s read of o. RECORD records this edge by recording the new value of gRdShCtr, i.e., c. The current thread T records both of these happens-before edges using the following pseudocode:

T.log. recordEvent(UPGRADING, currentSiteID, T.dynCtr, sourceThread.numConflReads, c);

where c is the result of atomically incrementing gRdShCtr, and sourceThread is the thread such that the object’s old state is RdExsourceThread. A same-thread upgrading transition from RdExT to WrExT does not require recording happens-before edges. Any cross thread dependences are implied by happens-before relation ships established as part of the prior transition to RdExT [9]. Fence transitions. Next in Figure 1, T4 reads o, trigger ing a fence transition because T4’s thread-local read-shared counter T4.rdShCount < c. The fence transition establishes a happens-before relationship with T3’s transition to RdShc and updates T.rdShCount to c. When T5 reads o, T5 has al ready read an object p in state RdShc+1, so no fence transition is triggered. However, a transitive happens-before relation ship with the prior write to o has been established transitively by (1) the happens-before edge from o’s RdShc transition to p’s RdShc+1 transition, (2) the fence transition on T6 when accessing p, and (3) program order on T5. At a fence transitions for an object in RdShc state, RE CORD records the happens-before edge from (1) the last upgrade to RdShc to (2) the current program point. Fig ure 1 shows two fence transitions: one establishes a happens before edge from T3 to T4, and the other establishes an edge from T6 to T5. A thread records a fence transition by record ing the current DPL and the value of c in the RdShc state:

T.log. recordEvent(FENCE, currentSiteID, T.dynCtr, c);

where c is the value in the object’s state RdShc.

3. Replaying Cross-Thread Dependences This section overviews REPLAY, a dynamic analysis that enforces the happens-before edges that RECORD recorded. REPLAY maintains dynamic program location (DPL), but it does not track locality states. At program memory accesses and safe points, REPLAY performs operations (based on per thread logs from RECORD) to replay the same sources and sinks of happens-before edges as during RECORD. Replaying happens-before edges between memory ac cesses is sufficient to enforce the same thread interleavings as during a recorded run, so the replayed execution need not perform program synchronization operations. In fact, the re played execution must elide synchronization operations in order to avoid deadlock, as Section 3.2 explains. 3.1 Replaying Recorded Happens-Before Edges REPLAY replays the same happens-before edges that RE CORD recorded. It must replay these happens-before re lationships both soundly and precisely. Missing a relation could lead to different interleavings; strengthening a rela tion could lead to deadlock. During REPLAY, each thread reads from the same per-thread log as during RECORD. At a high level, a thread replays the source of a happens-before edge by incrementing some counter (depending on the type of edge recorded) at the same DPL as during RECORD. A thread replays the sink of a happens-before edge by wait ing, at the same DPL as during RECORD, for the appropriate counter of the source thread to reach the recorded value. Fast-path instrumentation. For accesses that do not trigger a transition, RECORD records nothing. REPLAY optimizes for this case by performing the following “fast-path” instru mentation at each program memory access and safe point:

if (T.log.nextDynCtr == T.dynCtr && T.log. nextSiteID == currentSiteID) { /∗ Slow path: replay happens-before edge(s) ∗ / } ... = o.f; // program memory access

This check succeeds only if the current DPL matches the DPL of the next recorded event. If so, the instrumenta tion executes the “slow path,” which replays happens-before edge(s) from one of the following cases. Conflicting transitions. Replaying a conflicting transition involves replaying both the source and sink of the estab lished happens-before edge. Referring back to Figure 1 as an example, REPLAY replays the happens-before edge from T1’s safe point to T2’s load. REPLAY uses the follow ing slow-path instrumentation to replay the source of the happens-before edge:

if (T.log.nextEventType == RESPONSE) {

memory fence; 
T.responses++; 
T.log. readNextEntry(); 

} The memory fence helps ensure visibility from the source to the sink of the happens-before edge. The readNextEntry() operation reads the next event from the log and updates the variables T.log.nextDynCtr, T.log.nextSiteID, T.log.nextEvent Type, and other event data (depending on the event type). To replay the sink of the happens-before edge, slow path instrumentation performs the following instrumenta tion, which waits for the source thread’s responses counter to “catch up” to the recorded value:

if (T.log.nextEventType == REQUEST) { S = T.log.nextSourceThread; 
while (S. responses < T.log.nextExpectedResponses) { memory fence; /∗ and possible non-busy waiting ∗ / 
}if (isRead) // Assist replay of 
T.numConflReads++; // upgrading transitions 
memory fence; 
T.log. readNextEntry(); 

} where T.log.nextSourceThread is the recorded responding thread, and T.log.nextExpectedResponses is the recorded value of S.responses. As part of replaying a transition to RdExT, T increments the counter T.numConflReads, just as RECORD does, in order to help replay upgrading transitions. Upgrading transitions. To replay an upgrading transition, a thread must replay two happens-before edges recorded at upgrading transitions: one from the last reader thread, and one that globally orders gRdShCtr increments. The follow ing pseudocode shows how the instrumentation slow path replays these happens-before edges:

if (T.log.nextEventType == UPGRADING) { S = T.log.nextSourceThread; while (S.numConflReads < T.log.nextNumConflReads) { memory fence; /∗ and possible non-busy waiting ∗ /

}while (gRdShCtr < T.log.nextRdShCtr − 1) { memory fence; /∗ and possible non-busy waiting ∗ / 
} gRdShCtr = T.log.nextRdShCtr; 
memory fence; 
T.log. readNextEntry(); 

} where T.log.nextNumConflReads is the recorded value of S.numConflReads, and T.log.nextRdShCtr is the recorded value of gRdShCtr. The current thread T first replays the happens-before edge from the last reader thread, by waiting for it to reach the same point it reached during RECORD. In Figure 1, T3 re plays the edge from T2 by waiting for T2 to perform the same number of conflicting transitions involving a read (i.e.,

// T1: 
synchronized (m) { ... 
o. f = ...; 
... 

}

// T2: 
synchronized (m) { ... 
... = o.f; 
... 

} Figure 2. An example cross-thread data dependence. transitions to RdExT2), which guarantees that T3’s access transitively happens after the last write (by T1). Next, T waits for all prior gRdShCtr increments to occur, since gRdShCtr increments are globally ordered. T waits un til gRdShCtr equals T.log.nextRdShCtr - 1; then it increments gRdShCtr to T.log.nextRdShCtr. Fence transitions. To replay a fence transition on an object in RdShc state, a thread needs to replay the happens-before edge from the prior transition to RdShc. Thread T’s instru mentation slow path uses the following pseudocode to wait for gRdShCtr to reach the expected value:

if (T.log.nextEventType == FENCE) {while (gRdShCtr < T.log.nextRdShCtr) { memory fence; /∗ and possible non-busy waiting ∗ / } memory fence; T.log. readNextEntry();

} where T.log.nextRdShCtr is the recorded value c (from RdShc). In Figure 1, T4 replays a fence transition by wait ing for the global counter gRdShCtr to reach c. Similarly, T5 replays a fence transition by waiting for gRdShCtr to reach c+1. 3.2 Eliding Program Synchronization Operations A program uses program synchronization operations—such as lock acquire and release, monitor wait and notify, and thread fork and join—to provide mutual exclusion, ordering, and visibility, effectively constraining an execution’s possi ble cross-thread dependences. REPLAY provides these prop erties by enforcing all cross-thread data dependences, so a replayed execution does not need to perform program syn chronization operations. Not only can REPLAY elide synchronization operations, but it must do so. Consider the example in Figure 2. Suppose during RECORD, T1 acquires m’s lock first, so T1’s write of o.f occurs before the read, and RECORD records a happens before edge from T1 to T2’s read. If REPLAY performed syn chronization operations, then T2 could acquire m’s lock first, making it impossible to replay the write–read dependence on o. In that case, REPLAY would deadlock: T2’s load would wait on T1’s store, while T1 would wait to acquire m. REPLAY elides synchronization operations such as lock acquire and release and monitor wait, by treating them as no-ops. REPLAY (and RECORD) handle an access to a Java volatile variable or a C++ atomic variable like they handle any regular memory access.

Prior work typically records and replays synchroniza tion operations. RecPlay records and replays only synchro nization operations but is unsound for racy programs [38]. Chimera introduces synchronization in the form of “weak locks” at potentially racy memory accesses, but profile based coarsening is necessary to get good performance [26]. Respec and DoublePlay record only synchronization opera tions, but execute speculatively and check program state to ensure data races do not derail determinism [27, 40]. RE CORD and REPLAY could record and replay the order of synchronization operations in addition to cross-thread data dependences, adding additional, unnecessary overhead 3.3 Soundness of REPLAY The correctness of record & replay relies on the observation that value determinism (all reads performed by a replayed execution produce the same results as the original recorded execution) is achieved if all dependences in the recorded run are mimicked in the replayed run. To preserve all dependences between a recorded execu tion and its replay, it suffices to preserve only cross-thread dependences. Other dependences, which occur entirely on a single thread, will be enforced by the reordering restrictions of the compiler and hardware. Prior work shows that Octet creates happens-before re lationships between all cross-thread dependences in the recorded run [9]. The information logged by RECORD dur ing a recorded run is sufficient to allow REPLAY to deter ministically replay the recorded execution: Theorem 1. Given logs produced by RECORD during an execution, REPLAY deterministically replays that execution, preserving all dependences. Proof. We proceed by showing that every cross-thread de pendence in the recorded execution (hereafter referred to as rec) is respected by the replayed execution (referred to as rep). We need only account for cross-thread dependences that are not transitively implied by other dependences. We consider each type of dependence in turn. wX → wY In rec, this dependence is captured by RECORD as a transition from WrExX to WrExY, with Y as the re questing thread and X as the responding thread. X’s log notes the recorded value of its response counter, rcx, with a precise count of how many responses X had made prior to this point, as well as its DPL, while Y’s log notes the expected value of X’s response counter, rcy, with rcy > rcx. As X runs rep, it maintains a response counter, rc. When X reaches the dynamic program point where the coordination occurred, rc = rcx. It then in crements rc by the number of responses it made at this point, so rc ≥ rcy. When Y reaches the point where it made the request, it compares rcy to rc. If rc ≥ rcy, B can be sure that A has already performed its write, and hence B’s write will happen later, preserving the depen dence.

rX → wY In rec, prior to performing wY , Y will find obj in either RdExX or RdShc state. In either case, RECORD initiates coordination between X and Y. This scenario is therefore analogous to that of the previous case, and wY will occur after rX in rep, preserving the dependence. wX → rY There are three possible types of RECORD state transitions in rec that might arise due to this dependence. (i) WrExX → RdExY requires coordination, and would be enforced as in the previous cases. (ii) If WrExX → RdExZ → RdSh, Y reads obj after some third thread put it into RdExZ. In this case, REPLAY uses a simi lar mechanism as above to ensure that Z has moved past the point where it put obj into RdExZ, but using the Z.numConflReads counter instead of the response counter. Note that REPLAY will also cause Y to wait until any prior transitions to RdSh are complete (i.e., transitions to RdShc0 where c’ < c). (iii) rY could happen when obj was already in RdShc state. In this case, we note that updates to gRdShCtr are replayed at the correct times, and that during rec, Y would record c in its log before performing rY . Before performing rY in rep, Y ensures that gRd ShCtr is at least the recorded value. This ensures that all RdEx → RdSh transitions that happened before rY in rec have happened in rep, again preserving the dependence. All other dependences in the program are transitively im plied by some combination of these cross-thread depen dences and intra-thread dependences, which are maintained by the reordering rules of the compiler and hardware. Hence, all dependences in rec are preserved in rep, providing value determinism.

4. Deterministic Execution The prior sections described how to record and replay an ex ecution’s cross-thread data dependences. In the real world, an execution provided with the same set of inputs has other sources of nondeterminism—particularly for a managed lan guage virtual machine such as a Java virtual machine (JVM). Language VMs create significant nondeterminism as a con sequence of supporting features such as dynamic class load ing, dynamic optimization, and automatic memory manage ment. To demonstrate our REPLAY analysis, our goal is to pro vide application-level determinism: the RECORD and RE PLAY runs should appear identical from the application’s perspective, i.e., the two runs should perform the same loads from memory and get the same values, and the two runs should produce the same output (i.e., perform the same sys tem calls). 2 To provide application-level determinism, the JVM internally does not need to execute deterministically. However, some nondeterministic behaviors of the JVM affect application behavior that would otherwise be deter ministic. To provide application-level determinism, the JVM

2 Note that because Java does not make object addresses available to the ap plication, application-level determinism does not require layout determin ism. However, it does require deterministic hash codes (Section 4.3).

must control these sources of nondeterminism. We mod ify the JVM to handle sources of nondeterminism, either by recording and replaying them or by making them in herently deterministic. To deal with two particularly chal lenging sources of nondeterminism—dynamic compilation and class loading—we describe and implement a research methodology called fork-and-recompile that allows us to demonstrate replay. With substantially more engineering effort, we believe a production implementation could control sources of nonde terminism without requiring a research methodology, mak ing it practical for production settings (Section 4.6). Since our efforts to provide application-level determinism are largely at the implementation level, we first overview the implementations of RECORD and REPLAY. Subsequent subsections describe challenges and corresponding solutions for handling nondeterminism. 4.1 Implementation Overview We have implemented RECORD and REPLAY in Jikes RVM, a high-performance Java virtual machine [1]. The RECORD implementation builds on the publicly available Octet im plementation [9]. We will make our RECORD and REPLAY implementations publicly available. Instrumentation. RECORD and REPLAY modify Jikes RVM’s dynamic compilers to instrument all application and Java li brary code. However, Jikes RVM is itself written in Java, so it calls into the same Java libraries. RECORD and REPLAY need to instrument libraries called from the application, but not libraries called from the JVM. To accomplish this, the dynamic compilers compile two versions of each library method: for application context and JVM context. Maintaining DPL. During RECORD and REPLAY, each thread T maintains its current DPL by incrementing T.dynCtr at every method entry, method return, and loop back edge. During RECORD, at every program point in the application that is a potential safe point—meaning it might call into the VM and record a happens-before source—instrumentation stores the current static site in a per-thread variable. Com bining this static site with T.dynCtr allows RECORD to com pute an application DPL even though the coordination re sponse can occur within nested calls to the VM. REPLAY instruments all safe points to check whether the current DPL matches the next event in the current thread’s log. Eliding synchronization operations. REPLAY modifies the dynamic compilers to ignore lock acquire and release op erations (correponding to synchonized blocks in the original Java code). During REPLAY, Object.wait(), Object.notify(), and Object.notifyAll() have no effect if the this object’s lock has not been acquired. Instrumenting special accesses. The application performs some memory accesses by calling into the VM to perform the accesses. Examples are calling System.arraycopy(), Ob ject.clone(), I/O routines that implicitly read from or write to buffers), and calls from native code that access the Java heap. We have identified these cases and added explicit in strumentation so that RECORD and REPLAY perform appro priate checks before these memory accesses. 4.2 Compilation and Class Loading Nondeterminism Challenges of dynamic compilation. A compiled method may be recompiled multiple times at different optimization levels. Method inlining leads to different control flow, affect ing the frequency of T.dynCtr increments—and thus com puting DPL nondeterministically. Optimizations may elimi nate redundant loads and stores nondeterministically. Optimization decisions depend on timer-based sampling, and optimized compilation is by default performed concur rently with program execution [3], so optimization and ex ecution of optimized code are inherently nondeterministic from run to run. A production implementation could, in the ory, record and replay optimization decisions. Jikes RVM does not provide such support. It does support a methodol ogy called replay compilation that records some compilation decisions and profile information (called “advice”) to make compilation decisions somewhat deterministic in a run that uses the advice [20], but compiled code is not deterministic between runs that generate and use the advice. Challenges of dynamic class loading and initialization. When a class is first accessed, the accessing thread triggers class loading and initialization of the class. Which thread is first is nondeterministic; application-level replay of cross thread dependences does not make class loading and ini tialization deterministic automatically. Initializing a class in volves calling the class’s static initializer (static variable ini tialization and static { . . . } code blocks), which is applica tion code that must be executed by the same thread dur ing RECORD and REPLAY in order to provide determinism. Although triggering of class initializers can, in theory, be recorded and replayed, a more difficult problem is making custom class loaders (class loaders that call code provided by the application) deterministic. In custom class loading, the activities of the application and VM are tightly coupled, and accounting for this coupling is difficult: application context code elides synchronization operations, but VM context code perform synchronization operations, leading to deadlocks that we have been unable to avoid without com promising determinism. Solutions. A production-quality implementation could ad dress the challenges of nondeterministic dynamic compila tion, class initialization, and custom class loading through careful recording and replaying of these behaviors. Instead, we use a research methodology called fork-and-recompile that is unsuitable for most production settings, but enables demonstrating that RECORD and REPLAY preserve deter minism. In fork-and-recompile methodology, the JVM executes two iterations of the program. The sole purpose of the first, “warmup” iteration of the program is to compile all the code, and load and initialize all classes. These behaviors can be

nondeterministic, since both RECORD and REPLAY runs will start from the same state after the warmup iteration finishes. After the warmup iteration finishes, the JVM forks its process using the fork system call. Since fork on Linux works correctly only if the process has a single thread, our imple mentation first forces all threads—any remaining application threads, as well as system threads that perform compilation, GC, and profiling—except the main thread to terminate. Af ter fork returns, we designate the child process as the RE CORD process and the parent process as the REPLAY pro cess. The REPLAY process waits for the RECORD process to complete. After the RECORD process completes, the RE PLAY process proceeds. With some effort, it should be pos sible to run RECORD and REPLAY simultaneously, with RE PLAY reading directly from RECORD’s logs, demonstrating online replay. The RECORD and REPLAY processes each first recompile all application-context methods with RECORD or REPLAY instrumentation, respectively. They recompile each method using the same optimizations from the warmup iteration, providing a realistic mix of optimized and unoptimized code for evaluating performance. The RECORD and REPLAY pro cesses thus start from the same “state” in terms of dynamic compilation and loaded and initialized classes. 4.3 Nondeterminism Caused by Garbage Collection Challenges. Jikes RVM’s default high-performance gar bage collector (GC) is stop-the-world, parallel, and genera tional [7]. When a thread’s allocation triggers GC, all threads stop at GC-safe points (periodic program points where GC can happen safely). Then multiple GC threads perform either a nursery collection (which collects only recently allocated objects) or a full-heap collection. When GC is triggered is nondeterministic, even if the application executes determin istically, because the JVM allocates objects into the same heap. Furthermore, stopping each thread at a GC-safe point is inherently racy and nondeterministic. In theory, triggering GC nondeterministically might not affect application-level determinism, but in practice it presents several challenges. Nondeterministic GC leads to different behaviors for weak references and finalizers, whose behavior depends on when dead objects are collected. Furthermore, low-level I/O routines in Jikes RVM behave differently de pending on whether buffer objects are initially in moving or non-moving spaces (since they must operate on unmovable buffer objects). Triggering GC nondeterministically can also conflict with replaying recorded happens-before edges: if a thread is waiting at a happens-before sink, it cannot stop for GC—since program memory accesses are not, in general, GC-safe points. Not only is nondeterministic triggering of GC problem atic, but so is the nondeterministic behavior of GC, which moves objects nondeterministically and thus leads to nonde terministic object addresses. Furthermore, initial allocation addresses are nondeterministic due to VM allocation non determinism and GC nondeterminism. In theory, nondeter ministic object addresses should not affect application-level determinism since object addresses are not visible to the ap plication. However, in Jikes RVM and other JVMs, the de fault implementation of Object.hashCode() (i.e., the identity hash code) returns a value based on the object’s address. 3 Hash code values affect application determinism, e.g., they affect layout and iteration order in a hash table whose key objects use the identity hash code. Solutions. To avoid conflicting with other replayed happens before edges and to avoid nondeterministic behavior of weak references, finalizers, and I/O routines, the implementation records and replays GC points. During RECORD, each thread that triggers or joins a collection, records the event in its log: the DPL and whether the collection was nursery or full-heap. During REPLAY, threads perform GC at the recorded DPLs; they cannot trigger GC otherwise. To support application-level determinism, we allow ob ject addresses to be nondeterministic but make hash codes be deterministic. RECORD and REPLAY instrument each object allocation so it sets a dedicated header word to a de terministic encoding of the current thread T and dynamic counter T.dynCtr. The identity hash code operation Ob ject.hashCode() reads from and returns this value. 4.4 Other Nondeterministic System Behavior Challenges. Querying the current system time is inherently nondeterministic and can affect application behavior nonde terministically. Nondeterministic I/O is similarly problem atic, e.g., for interactive applications or network I/O. Solutions. Recording and replaying the value of system time could be expensive if queried often. Instead, our im plementation simulates deterministic time by keeping track of a counter that represents “logical time.” It increments log ical time whenever time is queried. Although time is con ceptually a global value, for simplicitly our implementation uses per-thread counters. This approach will not work well if a thread compares a time value from another thread or if time values need to correspond better to actual time values. However, it is good enough for the programs we evaluate. Our implementation and experiments avoid most chal lenges of nondeterministic I/O. We evaluate benchmarked programs that read and write the file system determinis tically, without reading from nondeterministic I/O sources such as the console or network. The implementation pro vides RECORD and REPLAY with the same initial directory structure by backing up the current directory’s contents be fore RECORD starts, and restoring the same before REPLAY starts. A production implementation would need to record and replay nondeterministic I/O sources and other system behavior such as the side effects of system calls. In contrast, our goal is to provide the minimum system- and JVM-level determinism needed to achieve application-level determin

3If GC moves an object whose Object.hashCode() method has been called, GC annotates the moved object with its old address, so that Ob ject.hashCode() continues to return the same value.

ism for our evaluated programs, in order to demonstrate and evaluate the RECORD and REPLAY analyses. 4.5 Verifying Determinism Even if an execution replays successfully, how do we know that its application-level behavior is the same as during the recorded execution? We define “same behavior” as mean ing that the program performed the same loads from mem ory and got the same values. The RECORD and REPLAY implementations support value logging configurations that record (during RECORD) and check (during REPLAY) the value of every program load and store—or a hash of the last k values—ensuring that REPLAY’s enforcement of happens before edges is sufficient to produce value determinism. The program should also perform the same system calls, e.g., output to the console. To ensure system call determin ism, we rely on each benchmark’s harness, which validates the contents of the console output and output files. 4.6 Making Determinism Practical With significantly more effort, it should be possible to pro vide determinism with standard “adaptive” methodology and with minimal performance impact. Prior work has provided efficient determinism for JVMs written in C/C++ (e.g., [13, 43]). A key challenge for our implementation is that Jikes RVM itself is written in Java and shares many components with the application, including the heap, the adaptive op timization subsystem, and the libraries. Cleanly separating the JVM and application would make it substantially easier and cheaper to provide application-level determinism. For example, application object addresses could be made deter ministic, automatically providing deterministic hash codes. Compilation and class loading decisions could be recorded and replayed in a way that would not interact poorly with the JVM.

5. Evaluation This section evaluates the effectiveness and efficiency of RE CORD and REPLAY using our JVM determinism modifica tions and fork-and-recompile methodology. 5.1 Methodology Benchmarks. Our experiments execute benchmarked ver sions of large, real-world applications: the DaCapo Bench marks versions 2006-10-MR2 and bach-9.12 (distinguished with suffixes 6 and 9) [6], excluding benchmarks that are single-threaded or that (unmodified) Jikes RVM cannot exe cute correctly; and fixed-workload versions of SPECjbb2000 and SPECjbb2005. 4 We exclude eclipse6 from most ex periments because (1) it fails with the fork-and-recompile methodology (we are unable to restart eclipse6’s worker threads correctly), and (2) runtime support for determinism causes eclipse6 to execute incorrectly. Experimental setup. To account for run-to-run variability (due to dynamic optimization guided by timer-based sam

4 http://www.spec.org/jbb200{0,5}, http://users.cecs.anu. edu.au/~steveb/research/research-infrastructure/pjbb2005 pling) and any machine noise, each performance result is the median of 15 trials. We also show the mean, as the cen ter of 95% confidence intervals. We build and use a high performance configuration of Jikes RVM that adaptively op timizes the application as it runs.

Platform. The experiments execute on an AMD Opteron 6272 system with eight 2 GHz 8-core processors (64 cores total), running 64-bit RedHat Enterprise Linux 6.5, kernel 2.6.32. We execute xalan9 using only 32 cores since it shows anomalous overhead with 64 cores (for xalan9 on 64 cores, all RECORD and REPLAY configurations outperform the un modified JVM, which we have determined is a side effect of Linux thread scheduling decisions).

5.2 RECORD & REPLAY Characteristics Table 2 shows statistics for recorded and replayed execu tions. Of 12 evaluated programs, 9 have at least 8 simulta neously live threads, and 5 programs have at least 32 live threads. Critically, we see that most accesses trigger no state transition, requiring no logging. Programs with a higher rate of triggering state transitions incur higher costs (Sec tion 5.3). The last column of the table shows that programs with a higher rate of state transitions lead to a higher rate of logging events, although the rate does not exceed 10 megabytes per second. Table 3 reports how frequently REPLAY successfully pro vides deterministic replay. Each percentage is the number of successfully replayed trials out of five trials using the fork and-recompile methodology. We enable value logging in or der to ensure that successfully replayed runs execute deter ministically (i.e., load the same value at each load). For most programs, the default REPLAY configuration consistently re plays recorded executions successfully. For xalan9, REPLAY sometimes fails. These failures are due to limitations of our implementation: sources of nondeterminism that we have not yet identified and addressed. (We have also observed that a few other programs will occasionally fail to replay. We ran additional trials to verify that with high confidence, the ex pected number of successful trials is closer to five than four.) How do we know REPLAY is actually doing anything im portant? That is, is it actually necessary to record and replay cross-thread dependences in order to replay these programs deterministically? The Ignore HB edges configuration ig nores recorded happens-before edges during replay, but en ables value logging. All executions fail, either with value logging errors or other program errors. The Keep sync. con figuration performs synchronization during replay, instead of eliding synchronization. All programs except jython9, which has little multithreaded behavior, deadlock consistently. These configurations’ failures demonstrate that replaying these programs deterministically does not happen serendip itously. Instead, deterministic replay requires recording and replaying cross-thread dependences accurately, and eliding synchronization operations during REPLAY.

Threads Transition triggered by each access Log All Live None Confl. Upgr. Fence MB/s hsqldb6 402 102 6.9× 10 8 9.1× 10 5 1.3× 10 5 6.3× 10 4 0.7 lusearch6 65 65 2.7× 10 9 4.8× 10 3 1.9× 10 2 2.5× 10 3 <0.1 xalan6 9 9 1.1× 10 10 1.8× 10 7 2.3× 10 3 4.3× 10 3 7.7 avrora9 27 27 5.8× 10 9 5.9× 10 6 8.9× 10 5 4.4× 10 6 2.5 jython9 3 3 7.3× 10 9 5.1× 10 1 0 0 <0.1 luindex9 2 2 3.7× 10 8 4.6× 10 2 5.2× 10 1 1.0× 10 0 <0.1 lusearch9 64 64 2.6× 10 9 3.7× 10 3 7.9× 10 2 6.8× 10 3 <0.1 pmd9 5 5 7.2× 10 8 5.4× 10 4 6.8× 10 3 2.0× 10 4 0.1 sunflow9 128 64 1.7× 10 10 7.2× 10 3 5.2× 10 3 2.1× 10 4 0.1 xalan9 32 32 1.1× 10 10 2.0× 10 7 1.4× 10 4 6.0× 10 4 9.7 pjbb2000 37 9 2.1× 10 9 1.2× 10 6 3.1× 10 5 3.1× 10 3 1.1

pjbb2005 9 9 7.8× 10 9 
4.6× 10 7 
6.4× 10 6 
1.5× 10 7 4.8 
Table 2. Characteristics of recorded and replayed executions, based on a statistics 
gathering configuration of RECORD. 

REPLAY Ignore Keep default HB edges sync. hsqldb6 100% 0% 0% lusearch6 100% 0% 0% xalan6 100% 0% 0% avrora9 100% 0% 0% jython9 100% 0% 80% luindex9 100% 0% 0% lusearch9 100% 0% 0% pmd9 100% 0% 0% sunflow9 100% 0% 0% xalan9 60% 0% 0% pjbb2000 100% 0% 0% pjbb2005 100% 0% 0% Table 3. Percentage of five executions re played successfully, for various REPLAY configurations.

5.3 Performance This section first evaluates RECORD by executing the JVM using the default “adaptive” methodology in which the JVM recompiles and optimizes methods at run time using online, sampling-based profiling. It then evaluates RECORD and REPLAY using our fork-and-recompile methodology.

Adaptive methodology. Figure 3 shows the overhead that RECORD adds to programs when using adaptive methodol ogy. Each bar is the run-time overhead over unmodified Jikes RVM. The first bar is the overhead of using Octet to track cross-thread dependences [9]. Octet adds 26% overhead on average. Programs with a higher rate of state transitions— especially conflicting transitions (Table 2)—incur more overhead. The program with the highest overhead, pjbb2005, also has the highest rate of conflicting transitions. High conflict programs are a general concern for our RECORD analysis and other analyses built on top of optimistic track ing of dependences. Addressing this issue is beyond the scope of this paper, but we note that recent work develops a hybrid of optimistic and pessimistic tracking that adap tively applies pessimistic tracking to high-conflict objects, reducing overhead substantially for high-conflict programs without significantly impacting low-conflict programs [12]. Record nondet includes the additional costs to record happens-before edges identified by Octet. These costs in clude writing happens-before sources and sinks to per-thread logs on disk, incrementing T.dynCtr to maintain DPL, and setting the last application site ID at every potential safe point that might call into the JVM. This nondeterministic RECORD configuration adds an additional 17% overhead (relative to baseline execution) over Octet, and 43% overall. Finally, Record is the full default RECORD configuration. It adds support for making some JVM features deterministic, such as making GC, hash codes, and system time determin istic. These features have their costs, e.g., deterministic hash codes must be initialized at allocation time, but together they add modest overhead: 6% (relative to baseline execution) on eclipse6 hsqldb6 lusearch6 xalan6 avrora9 jython9 luindex9 lusearch9 pmd9 sunflow9 xalan9 pjbb2000 pjbb2005 geomean

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Octet 
Record nondet 
Record 

Figure 3. RECORD performance using default adaptive methodol ogy.

hsqldb6 lusearch6 xalan6 avrora9 jython9 luindex9 lusearch9 pmd9 sunflow9 pjbb2000 pjbb2005 geomean

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

) Record Replay

Figure 4. RECORD and REPLAY performance using fork-and recompile methodology. average over nondeterministic RECORD. Overall, RECORD slows program execution by 49% on average. These RECORD results serve as a comparison against the following results, which use nonstandard methodology but support both RECORD and REPLAY. Fork-and-recompile methodology. Figure 4 shows the over head RECORD and REPLAY add over an unmodified JVM. All configurations, including the baseline (unmodified JVM) configuration, use the fork-and-recompile methodology de scribed in Section 4.2. Record is the default recording configuration; it is the same as the Record configuration from Figure 3. With fork

and-recompile methodology, RECORD adds 44% overhead on average, which is comparable to the 49% overhead us ing adaptive methodology (Figure 3). For some programs, the overhead of RECORD is substantially different between the two methodologies. We find that differences are due to the fact that adaptive execution includes compilation time and spends time executing unoptimized code before opti mizing it, whereas fork-and-recompile methodology does not. Shorter-running programs experience this effect more acutely than longer-running programs. Replay is the full default REPLAY analysis: it replays cross-thread dependences, tracks DPL by updating T.dynCtr, and includes the determinism changes used by RECORD. We exclude xalan9 because it almost never replays successfully without value logging, although it often replays successfully with value logging (Table 3), since its nondeterministic fail ures are timing sensitive. Interestingly, REPLAY often outperforms RECORD. RE PLAY can provide lower overhead than RECORD because it is cheaper to replay known dependences than to record unknown dependences. In particular, RECORD requires that threads coordinate for a conflicting transition, but replaying a conflicting transition’s happens-before edge requires no synchronization except memory fences. Furthermore, RE PLAY can improve performance over RECORD or even the baseline by enabling more parallelism. Since REPLAY elides program synchronization, it allows code protected by criti cal sections and other synchronization to overlap more. For example, in Figure 2 (page 5), both threads can enter their critical sections at the same time. The benchmark pjbb2005 uses coarse-grained synchronization that is more conser vative than the actual cross-thread data dependences. By eliding synchronization and replaying only the cross-thread data dependences, REPLAY outperforms baseline (unmodi fied JVM) execution. On average, REPLAY’s run-time overhead is 29%. The overheads of RECORD and REPLAY compare favorably with other approaches that provide both online and offline replay on commodity systems [26, 40].

6. Related Work Existing record & replay approaches incur high overhead, require hardware support, and/or have other serious limita tions. Tracking dependences. RecPlay and JaRec record high level races (races between synchronization operations) by recording dependences among synchronization operations such as lock acquire–release and monitor wait–notify [19, 38]. However, these approaches are unsound for executions with data races. Data races are difficult to eliminate; programmers acci dentally or intentionally introduce data races when trying to minimize synchronization costs. Detecting or eliminating data races is a well-studied problem (e.g., [10, 18, 30]). Even with recent advances, dynamic approaches slow programs by about an order of magnitude [18]. Static race detection analysis reports many false positives and does not scale well to large, real-world programs [30, 31]. Instant Replay and ORDER track dependences in racy ex ecutions by instrumenting all memory accesses, adding high instrumentation overhead [25, 43]. Dunlap et al. achieve re cord and replay in commodity hardware by using virtual memory page protection to trigger hardware traps at poten tially conflicting accesses [17]; false sharing at page granu larity can easily lead to high overhead. Chimera uses whole-program static race detection to eliminate instrumentation at definitely data-race-free ac cesses [26]. However, the remaining instrumentation still slows programs by more than an order of magnitude. Chimera reduces costs further by converting fine-grained synchro nization to coarse-grained synchronization. However, this lock coarsening relies on profiling to identify low-conflict regions suitable for the optimization. Chimera slows pro grams by 86% on average for CPU-intensive benchmarks. Our approach is complementary to Chimera’s and could po tentially be combined with it. Hardware support. Custom hardware support can achieve low-overhead record & replay by piggybacking on cache co herence protocols [21, 22, 29, 32, 36, 42]. However, manu facturers have been reluctant to add complexity to already complex coherence protocols. Sidestepping recording dependences. Several approaches avoid recording cross-thread dependences explicitly. Respec supports online replay by recording synchronization oper ations and speculating that most data races do not lead to external effects, but cannot provide offline replay without additional support such as probabilistic search [27]. Other approaches offer probabilistic offline replay based on repro ducing executions from limited recorded information, but do not support online replay, nor are they guaranteed to reproduce an execution within a bounded number of at tempts [2, 23, 35, 41]. DoublePlay supports both online and offline replay [40], but needs twice the number of cores to achieve low overhead. Without extra cores, DoublePlay adds 100% overhead. Deterministic execution. An alternative to record & replay is executing multithreaded programs deterministically [5, 15, 16, 28, 34]. Runtime determinism approaches face chal lenges similar to those for record & replay. They either do not handle racy programs [34], add high overhead [5, 15], or require custom hardware [16]. Dthreads provides deter minism by mapping threads to processes in order to pro vide separate address spaces for each thread, which it merges at each synchronization point [28]. This approach does not scale well to programs that use a lot of fine-grained synchro nization or cross-thread sharing of pages. New languages can provide determinism at the language level [8, 37]. Determinator provides determinism with sup port from the programming model and operating system [4]. Using these approaches requires rewriting programs.

Making JVMs deterministic. Prior work has made JVMs deterministic through a combination of controlling and recording nondeterministic behavior [13, 19, 43]. That work either modifies JVMs written in C/C++ [13, 43], or does not modify the JVM and instead uses dynamic bytecode rewrit ing [19]. Our implementation faces an additional challenge: it targets a JVM written in Java that shares components with the application. But rather than producing a production ready approach, our goal is to evaluate the RECORD and REPLAY analyses, so we introduce a research methodology and JVM modifications that control most sources of JVM nondeterminism. Prior work called Ditto also modifies Jikes RVM, but its support for deterministic replay appears to be quite limited: it can replay microbenchmarks only, not real programs [39].

### 7. Conclusion

Our new REPLAY analysis shows how to replay depen dences recorded by an existing efficient RECORD analysis. To demonstrate replayability of our prototype implementa tion, we modify a JVM to control sources of nondetermin ism and to support a research methodology that helps pro vide application-level determinism. Our RECORD and RE PLAY analyses outperform competing approaches that target commodity systems and do not have severe limitations, sug gesting that this work is a promising direction for achieving practical multithreaded record & replay in production sys tems.

### Acknowledgments

Thanks to Swarnendu Biswas, Brian Demsky, Joe Devietti, Madan Musuvathi, Aritra Sengupta, and Minjia Zhang for helpful ideas and other feedback.

References [1] B. Alpern, S. Augart, S. M. Blackburn, M. Butrico, A. Cocchi, P. Cheng, J. Dolby, S. Fink, D. Grove, M. Hind, K. S. McKin ley, M. Mergen, J. E. B. Moss, T. Ngo, and V. Sarkar. The Jikes Research Virtual Machine Project: Building an Open Source Research Community. IBM Systems Journal, 44:399– 417, 2005. [2] G. Altekar and I. Stoica. ODR: Output-Deterministic Replay for Multicore Debugging. In SOSP, pages 193–206, 2009. [3] M. Arnold, S. J. Fink, D. Grove, M. Hind, and P. F. Sweeney. Adaptive Optimization in the Jalapeno JVM. In ˜ OOPSLA, pages 47–65, 2000. [4] A. Aviram, S.-C. Weng, S. Hu, and B. Ford. Efficient System Enforced Deterministic Parallelism. In OSDI, pages 1–16, 2010. [5] T. Bergan, O. Anderson, J. Devietti, L. Ceze, and D. Gross man. CoreDet: A Compiler and Runtime System for Deter ministic Multithreaded Execution. In ASPLOS, pages 53–64, 2010. [6] S. M. Blackburn, R. Garner, C. Hoffman, A. M. Khan, K. S. McKinley, R. Bentzur, A. Diwan, D. Feinberg, D. Frampton, S. Z. Guyer, M. Hirzel, A. Hosking, M. Jump, H. Lee, J. E. B. Moss, A. Phansalkar, D. Stefanovic, T. VanDrunen, D. von ´ Dincklage, and B. Wiedermann. The DaCapo Benchmarks: Java Benchmarking Development and Analysis. In OOPSLA, pages 169–190, 2006.

[7] S. M. Blackburn and K. S. McKinley. Immix: A Mark-Region Garbage Collector with Space Efficiency, Fast Collection, and Mutator Performance. In PLDI, pages 22–32, 2008. [8] R. L. Bocchino, Jr., V. S. Adve, S. V. Adve, and M. Snir. Parallel Programming Must Be Deterministic by Default. In HotPar, pages 4–9, 2009. [9] M. D. Bond, M. Kulkarni, M. Cao, M. Zhang, M. Fathi Salmi, S. Biswas, A. Sengupta, and J. Huang. Octet: Capturing and Controlling Cross-Thread Dependences Efficiently. In OOPSLA, pages 693–712, 2013. [10] C. Boyapati, R. Lee, and M. Rinard. Ownership Types for Safe Programming: Preventing Data Races and Deadlocks. In OOPSLA, pages 211–230, 2002. [11] T. C. Bressoud and F. B. Schneider. Hypervisor-Based Fault Tolerance. In SOSP, pages 1–11, 1995. [12] M. Cao, M. Zhang, and M. D. Bond. Drinking from Both Glasses: Adaptively Combining Pessimistic and Optimistic Synchronization for Efficient Parallel Runtime Support. In WoDet, 2014. [13] J.-D. Choi and H. Srinivasan. Deterministic Replay of Java Multithreaded Applications. In SPDT, pages 48–59, 1998. [14] J. Chow, T. Garfinkel, and P. M. Chen. Decoupling Dynamic Program Analysis from Execution in Virtual Environments. In USENIX, pages 1–14, 2008. [15] H. Cui, J. Wu, C.-C. Tsai, and J. Yang. Stable Deterministic Multithreading Through Schedule Memoization. In OSDI, pages 1–13, 2010. [16] J. Devietti, B. Lucia, L. Ceze, and M. Oskin. DMP: Deter ministic Shared Memory Multiprocessing. In ASPLOS, pages 85–96, 2009. [17] G. W. Dunlap, D. G. Lucchetti, M. A. Fetterman, and P. M. Chen. Execution Replay of Multiprocessor Virtual Machines. In ACM/USENIX International Conference on Virtual Execu tion Environments, pages 121–130, 2008. [18] C. Flanagan and S. N. Freund. FastTrack: Efficient and Precise Dynamic Race Detection. In PLDI, pages 121–133, 2009. [19] A. Georges, M. Christiaens, M. Ronsse, and K. De Boss chere. JaRec: A Portable Record/Replay Environment for Multi-threaded Java Applications. Software Practice & Ex perience, 34(6):523–547, 2004. [20] A. Georges, L. Eeckhout, and D. Buytaert. Java Performance Evaluation through Rigorous Replay Compilation. In OOP SLA, pages 367–384, 2008. [21] D. R. Hower and M. D. Hill. Rerun: Exploiting Episodes for Lightweight Memory Race Recording. In ISCA, pages 265– 276, 2008. [22] D. R. Hower, P. Montesinos, L. Ceze, M. D. Hill, and J. Tor rellas. Two Hardware-Based Approaches for Deterministic Multiprocessor Replay. CACM, 52:93–100, 2009. [23] J. Huang, C. Zhang, and J. Dolby. CLAP: Recording Local Executions to Reproduce Concurrency Failures. In PLDI, pages 141–152, 2013. [24] L. Lamport. Time, Clocks, and the Ordering of Events in a Distributed System. CACM, 21(7):558–565, 1978. [25] T. J. LeBlanc and J. M. Mellor-Crummey. Debugging Parallel Programs with Instant Replay. IEEE TOC, 36:471–482, 1987. [26] D. Lee, P. M. Chen, J. Flinn, and S. Narayanasamy. Chimera: Hybrid Program Analysis for Determinism. In PLDI, pages 463–474, 2012. [27] D. Lee, B. Wester, K. Veeraraghavan, S. Narayanasamy, P. M. Chen, and J. Flinn. Respec: Efficient Online Multiprocessor Replay via Speculation and External Determinism. In ASP LOS, pages 77–90, 2010.

[28] T. Liu, C. Curtsinger, and E. D. Berger. Dthreads: Efficient Deterministic Multithreading. In SOSP, pages 327–336, 2011. [29] P. Montesinos, L. Ceze, and J. Torrellas. DeLorean: Recording and Deterministically Replaying Shared-Memory Multipro cessor Execution Efficiently. In ISCA, pages 289–300, 2008. [30] M. Naik and A. Aiken. Conditional Must Not Aliasing for Static Race Detection. In POPL, pages 327–338, 2007. [31] M. Naik, A. Aiken, and J. Whaley. Effective Static Race Detection for Java. In PLDI, pages 308–319, 2006. [32] S. Narayanasamy, C. Pereira, and B. Calder. Recording Shared Memory Dependencies Using Strata. In ASPLOS, pages 229–240, 2006. [33] E. B. Nightingale, D. Peek, P. M. Chen, and J. Flinn. Paral lelizing Security Checks on Commodity Hardware. In ASP LOS, pages 308–318, 2008. [34] M. Olszewski, J. Ansel, and S. Amarasinghe. Kendo: Efficient Deterministic Multithreading in Software. In ASPLOS, pages 97–108, 2009. [35] S. Park, Y. Zhou, W. Xiong, Z. Yin, R. Kaushik, K. H. Lee, and S. Lu. PRES: Probabilistic Replay with Execution Sketching on Multiprocessors. In SOSP, pages 177–192, 2009. [36] G. Pokam, C. Pereira, K. Danne, R. Kassa, and A.-R. Adl-Tabatabai. Architecting a Chunk-based Memory Race Recorder in Modern CMPs. In MICRO, pages 576–585, 2009. [37] M. C. Rinard and M. S. Lam. The Design, Implementation, and Evaluation of Jade. TOPLAS, 20:483–545, 1998. [38] M. Ronsse and K. De Bosschere. RecPlay: A Fully Integrated Practical Record/Replay System. TOCS, 17:133–152, 1999. [39] J. M. Silva, J. Simao, and L. Veiga. Ditto – Deterministic ˜ Execution Replayability-as-a-Service for Java VM on Multi processors. In Middleware, pages 405–424, 2013. [40] K. Veeraraghavan, D. Lee, B. Wester, J. Ouyang, P. M. Chen, J. Flinn, and S. Narayanasamy. DoublePlay: Parallelizing Sequential Logging and Replay. In ASPLOS, pages 15–26, 2011. [41] D. Weeratunge, X. Zhang, and S. Jagannathan. Analyzing Multicore Dumps to Facilitate Concurrency Bug Reproduc tion. In ASPLOS, pages 155–166, 2010. [42] M. Xu, R. Bodik, and M. D. Hill. A “Flight Data Recorder” for Enabling Full-system Multiprocessor Deterministic Re play. In ISCA, pages 122–135, 2003. [43] Z. Yang, M. Yang, L. Xu, H. Chen, and B. Zang. ORDER: Object Centric Deterministic Replay for Java. In USENIX, pages 30–30, 2011.

