# EReinit: Scalable and efficient fault‐tolerance for bulk‐synchronous MPI applications

Concurrency and Computation Practice and Experience. Published: 2018-08-14. 20 citations.

## Authors

- Sourav Chakraborty (The Ohio State University): h-index 18; 1,039 citations; corresponding author
- Ignacio Laguna (Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory): h-index 22; 1,459 citations
- Murali Emani (Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory): h-index 19; 1,218 citations
- Kathryn Mohror (Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory): h-index 25; 2,627 citations
- Dhabaleswar K. Panda (The Ohio State University): h-index 53; 12,820 citations
- Martin Schulz (Technical University of Munich): h-index 54; 10,611 citations
- Hari Subramoni (The Ohio State University): h-index 31; 3,363 citations

## Topics

- Distributed systems and fault tolerance
- Advanced Data Storage Technologies
- Parallel Computing and Optimization Techniques

## Funding

- Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
- National Science Foundation
  - II-New: Infrastructure for Energy-Aware High Performance Computing (HPC) and Data Analytics on Heterogeneous Systems
  - Collaborative Research: Chameleon: A Large-Scale, Reconfigurable Experimental Environment for Cloud Research
  - SHF: Large: Collaborative Research: Next Generation Communication Mechanisms exploiting Heterogeneity, Hierarchy and Concurrency for Emerging HPC Systems
- U.S. Department of Energy

---

# EReinit: Scalable and efficient fault-tolerance for bulk synchronous MPI applications

Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience

Disclaimer This document was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States government. Neither the United States government nor Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC, nor any of their employees makes any warranty, expressed or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States government or Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States government or Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC, and shall not be used for advertising or product endorsement purposes.

Sourav Chakraborty 1 Murali Emani 2

Kathryn Mohror 2

Ignacio Laguna 2

Dhabaleswar K. Panda 1 Martin Schulz 3 Hari Subramoni 1

1The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio
2Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
Livermore, California
3Technische Universität München, Munich,
Germany
Correspondence
Sourav Chakraborty, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio.
Email: chakraborty.52@osu.edu
Funding information
National Science Foundation, Grant/Award
Number: #CCF-1565414, #CNS-1419123,
#CNS-1513120, #ACI-1450440 and
#IIS-1447804; U.S. Department of Energy by
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
Grant/Award Number: DEAC52-07NA27344
and (LLNL-JRNL-706037)

Summary

Scientists from many different fields have been developing Bulk-Synchronous MPI applications to simulate and study a wide variety of scientific phenomena. Since failure rates are expected to increase in larger-scale future HPC systems, providing efficient fault-tolerance mechanisms for this class of applications is paramount. The global-restart model has been proposed to decrease the time of failure recovery in Bulk-Synchronous applications by allowing a fast reinitialization of MPI. However, the current implementations of this model have several drawbacks: they lack efficiency; their scalability have not been shown; and they require the use of the MPI profiling interface, which precludes the use of tools. In this paper, we present EREINIT, an implementation of the global-restart model that addresses these problems. Our key idea and optimization is the co-design of basic fault-tolerance mechanisms such as failure detection, notification, and recov ery between MPI and the resource manager in contrast to current approaches on which these mechanisms are implemented in MPI only. We demonstrate EREINIT in three HPC programs and show that it is up to four times more efficient than existing solutions at 4,096 processes.

KEYWORDS fault tolerance, high-performance computing, MPI, resilience 1 INTRODUCTION

The scaling trends in device sizes and power consumption in high-end HPC systems is likely to lead to higher failure rates in future systems,1 and applications will need mechanisms to deal with this. While the Message-Passing Interface (MPI) is the de-facto standard for developing large-scale HPC applications, its current support for fault-tolerance (FT) is limited. Although several FT programming models, ie, styles of programming that allow applications to tolerate failures, have been proposed for MPI applications,2-12 no consensus has been reached on which is the right approach for the MPI Standard. The Bulk-Synchronous Parallel (BSP) model13 has been used for years to program highly scalable parallel MPI applications.* In contrast to other parallel programming models such as master/slave where a process or node failure can be mitigated locally, a failure in a bulk-synchronous applica tion propagates quickly to all processes due to the tightly-coupled structure of these applications. As a result, returning all processes to a previous checkpoint (eg, via checkpoint/restart) is usually the easiest and the most common approach to tolerate failures in these applications. New meth ods to improve the efficiency of MPI reinitialization can therefore help bulk-synchronous applications to recover from failures faster and more efficiently. Global-restart is a fault-tolerance model that aims at making MPI reinitialization more efficient for bulk-synchronous applications that rely on synchronous checkpoint/restart. Its utility has been demonstrated by instantiations of the model such as Fenix3 and Reinit.10 The idea behind global-restart is to provide a simple mechanism to restore application state after a failure to a previous consistent state and then resume com putation from that state. In global-restart, applications do not need to perform steps to detect and propagate failures, and to recover MPI state

*In the rest of the paper, we refer to applications that use this model as bulk-synchronous applications.

(eg, communicators), these steps are performed by external components (eg, the MPI library or the resource manager). Once a failure is detected, the application gets an MPI state that is similar to the state after MPI_Init. Since MPI is effectively reinitialized and the parallel job is not termi nated, this method enables a number of optimizations that can reduce significantly failure recovery time, including avoiding job/resource allocation time, enabling the reuse of existing process connections and enabling the application to load checkpoints from memory for alive processes. Although global-restart is a useful fault-tolerance method, the current instantiations of the model either lack scalability and require the use of the profiling interface,3 or they have not been demonstrated on a real-world MPI implementation.10 In particular, in our study, we found that the placement of fault-tolerance primitives—failure detection, notification, and recovery—in the software stack plays an important role in determining the efficiency of the model instantiation. These primitives can be completely implemented on top ofMPI, eg, using the profilingMPI interface (PMPI) as shown in the work of Gamell et al.3 However, a more efficient and less-constraint implementation of the model can be achieved by co-designing it between MPI and resource managers. Based on this insight, we propose an efficient and scalable instantiation of the global-restartmodel, called EREINIT †. Our key optimization strategy is to implement fault-tolerance primitives for failure detection, notification, and recovery in low-level software layers such as the resource manager in contrast to the existing work that implements them fully on top of MPI. Our results show that this strategy provides substantial performance and scalability improvements over other global-restart instantiations that implement fault-tolerance primitives in higher-level software layers. We implement EREINIT in the MVAPICH2 MPI library14 and the SLURM resource manager.15 We compare EREINIT to two existing solutions: (a) a job-restart approach using checkpoint/restart and (b) a state-of-the-art instantiation of the global-restart model that uses the mechanisms described in the work of Gamell et al.3 Using three representative bulk-synchronous HPC programs—Enzo16 Lulesh17 and CoMD18—we show that EREINIT can scale up to thousands of cores, is able to recover from over one hundred concurrent processes failures, and is up to four times faster than existing solutions at 4,096 processes.

## 2. DESIGN OF EREINIT

In this section, we give a description of the global-restart model execution flow, the drawbacks of existing instantiations, and our methodology to address these drawbacks in the design of EREINIT.

2.1 Execution flow of global-restart

Although both Fenix3 and Reinit9,10 have similar interfaces to implement the global-restart model, in the rest of the paper, we use the Reinit interface to describe the execution flow of global-restart model since this interface is more generic (eg, it leaves checkpointing related tasks to applications themselves or external libraries). To understand the execution flow of the model, it is useful to examine the interface provided by the instantiation. A summary of the Reinit interface is shown in Figure 1. Theresilient_mainfunction is the main application function, which contains the computation loops and where checkpoints are stored and loaded (a similar function, called Fenix_Init, is used in Fenix). The MPI_Start_state parameter, which is passed to the function, allows processes to determine their state, ie, whether they are newly added or restarted processes. This is required to efficiently load checkpoints. For example, a spare process, which replaces a failed one, may need to load a checkpoint from stable storage, whereas a surviving process can read it from memory. ‡ Figure 2 shows the execution flow of Reinit. Initially, all processes have the NEW state.When a failure is detected by theMPI runtime, a notification is sent to the alive processes through an out-of-band communication channel. This notification is handled by the MPI library itself and not exposed directly to the application through a synchronous failure detection API. Once the surviving processes receive the failure notification, the state of their MPI runtime is finalized and initialized again. Then, the processes re-enter the resilient_main function with the RESTARTED state. The failed process is replaced by a new process, which enters resilient_main function with the ADDED state.

2.2 Fault-tolerance primitives and their placement

To allow the execution flow mentioned above, any instantiation of the global-restart model must implement three fundamental features19: failure detection, failure propagation (or notification), and recovery. We call these features fault-tolerance (FT) primitives. Fundamentally, FT primitives can be placed in one of two layers in the software stack: (a) the MPI layer or (b) the resource and process manager layer. Where these primitives are placed and how they are implemented play a crucial role in the performance an instantiation of the model. Next, we discuss the pros and cons of both these placement strategies.

†EREINIT: Efficient Reinit ‡For simplicity, we omit for now details of the interface that are not related to MPI reinitialization.

CHAKRABORTY ET AL. 3 of 13
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
FIGURE 1 Summary of the Reinit interface. A more detailed description can be found in the works of Laguna et al9,10

FIGURE 2 Execution flow of Reinit. Initially, all processes have NEW state. After a failure, the state is either RESTARTED for surviving processes or ADDED for processes that have been added to replaced failed processes

Existing Instantiations: Primitives Placed in MPI. To understand the importance of primitives placement, we use Fenix as the state-of-the-art instantiation of global restart. The reason for using Fenix instead of Reinit is that Fenix is the only full instantiation that has been reported in the literature so far and that has been demonstrated in existing large-scale applications.3 The conceptual interface of Reinit was proposed in the work of Laguna et al9, and the advantages of reinitializing MPI have been shown in another work by Laguna et al10; however, no full real-world implemen tation and/or scalability measurements have been shown so far in Reinit. Thus, although we use Reinit's interface, in terms of technical design and implementation, we compare our approach (EREINIT) to the methods described in the work of Gamell et al.3 Fenix's design places primitives in the MPI layer, using ULFM11 to detect and propagate failures. For recovery, it uses a combination of ULFM and MPI calls: MPI_Comm_shrink (from ULFM) is used to shrink the MPI_COMM_WORLD communicator (to eliminate the failed process from it), and MPI_Comm_spawn is used to replace the failed process by a fresh process. The shrink operation involves using a consensus protocol to perform agreements. Note that this approach has the disadvantage that consensus protocols require the participation of all MPI processes to determine a failure. In addition, MPI_Intercomm_merge is required to restore the state of MPI_COMM_WORLD. The spawn and merge operations are expensive and scale poorly in current implementations. This design is shown conceptually in the left side of Figure 3. Another disadvantage of this design is that recovery, in particular, node-failure recovery, is fundamentally difficult to implement efficiently with out support from lower software layers such as the resource manager. In practice, MPI_Comm_spawn cannot request extra nodes to be added to the job to replace failed ones and can only use preallocated spare nodes, which limits its practical utility. In fact, the current instantiation of ULFM, and as consequence Fenix, does not support node failures. For example, when we inject failures into our implementation of Fenix, by killing all the processes in a node, including MPI processes and runtime processes, it crashes. We discussed these findings with the ULFM developers and they acknowledged the limitation. Note that this is a limitation of the current instantiation and not of the model itself. ULFM developers notified us that this will be fixed in future versions. A third disadvantage of this approach is that implementing fault-tolerance primitives purely on top of MPI requires the use of the profiling inter face (PMPI) to make the job of fixing broken communicators in the application more manageable to programmers. Unfortunately, this prohibits the FIGURE 3 Overview of the design of EREINIT and one of our key contributions: fault-tolerance primitives are moved from the MPI layer (high/middle-level layer) to the resource manager (low-level layer). This eliminates the computational cost of consensus-based protocols to detect and propagate failures and enables efficient node failure recovery use of tools (eg, performance or debugging tools) since, currently, the PMPI interface only supports a single tool at a time. Approaches such as20 can be used to enable multiple tools to inter-operate simultaneously; however, these methods are not part of the MPI Standard yet. Our Approach: Placing Primitives in Low-Level Components.To overcome the drawbacks mentioned above, we place FT primitives in a low-level layer: the resource manager (RM). A common architecture used in RMs for MPI jobs is shown in the right of Figure 3, where processes are launched in nodes, called node processes, which in turn spawn the job MPI processes, forming a tree. There is a manager process, or controller, that launches/controls the node processes. In contrast to consensus-based failure detection, these node processes can operate as monitors and can detect MPI process failures locally in a node. Recovery involves spawning a replacement MPI process locally and notifying the rest of the node processes. This occurs by informing the manager, which in turn informs the node processes in other nodes. Node failures can be detected by parent node processes. In this case, recovery involves finding a replacement node, which is done by the manager, and like in the process failure case, it also involves notifying the rest of the node processes through the manager.

## 3. IMPLEMENTATION OF EREINIT

In this section, we present the primary implementation aspects of EREINIT. We implement the MPI functionality in MVAPICH2, using Reinit as the base interface and the resource manager functionality in Slurm. While we choose MVAPICH2 and Slurm since they represent a widely used open-source combination of MPI library and resource manager in HPC clusters, our conceptual design can also be implemented using a different software stack, eg, in Open MPI21 and the ORTE runtime. 22 3.1 Modifications to slurm

As a resource manager, Slurm acts as a centralized entity that allocates and keeps track of resources requested by the application. It also has node-level agents (daemons) that can spawn processes and communicate with the central entity as required, as Figure 3 shows.We enhanced Slurm to accomplish process and node failure detection, propagation, and recovery as follows (see Figure 4).

3.1.1 Process failures Detecting Process Failures. When an MPI application is launched, the node level daemons, called slurmd, launch the application processes. Since all processes are fork/exec-ed by the daemon, the daemon is notified by the operating system whenever a process exits. If a process exits with a non-zero exit code, the daemon treats this as a failure and notifies the controller daemon using a point-to-point message. When multiple processes on the same node fail within a short period, they are combined into a single message. Propagation of Failure. In scalable resource managers, such as Slurm, the node-level daemons form a hierarchical tree, which typically goes over the secondary Ethernet network. Communication between the controller and the daemons can be done via direct point-to-point messages or over this tree. In the case of process failures, the node daemons and the tree are not affected. Consequently, this tree structure provides a reliable com munication substrate over which a failure notification can be broadcasted all daemons. These daemons on each node then notify their processes as shown in Figure 4. This allows reliable propagation of process failures without requiring expensive consensus algorithms.

FIGURE 4 Detection/recovery of process/node failures in SLURM

Signal Handlers. MPI libraries rarely need to communicate with the resource manager except during initialization and completion. Furthermore, this communication is synchronous and always initiated by the MPI library. Thus, the MPI library needs to poll the resource manager at regular intervals to become aware of a failure, which is inefficient. Further, since the MPI library can only poke the resource manager when it is executing an MPI call, an application performing a long running computation may be unnecessarily delayed from receiving a failure notification. To ensure that application processes can be promptly notified of a failure while avoiding any overhead associated with polling, an asynchronous notification mechanism is required. We achieve this by making the MPI library register a signal handler for SIGUSR1 during initialization. Once the daemon receives a failure notification message, it sends the signal to its children (the application processes). Recovery from Process Failures. For process failures, the node daemon simply restarts the failed rank. It also sets certain environment variables to inform the restarted rank that it is a replacement for a failed rank. The restarted process synchronizes with the surviving processes using a PMI barrier. Using the same PMI interface, it also publishes its network address and fetches the addresses of the surviving processes to establish connec tions. This avoids costly spawn and merge operations (the approach inMPI-level model instantiations like Fenix) and does not require any reordering of the ranks (see the left part of Figure 4).

3.1.2 Node failures Detecting Node Failures. Slurm checks the health of nodes by sending ping messages from the controller to the node daemons. These messages use an out-of-band channel and do not interfere with the application's communication. If the controller identifies one of multiple nodes as failed, it declares all the processes on the dead nodes as faulty and initiates the failure propagation. There are other possible ways to detect node failure, such as the ring-based detection scheme described in the work of Bosilca et al.23 However, we use this method to take advantage of SLURM's existing cluster health-check infrastructure. Propagation of Failures.A node failure renders the node-level daemon inoperable; thus, it cannot participate in propagating the failure message. As a result, the aforementioned overlay network must be enhanced to provide reliable broadcast even when one or more nodes are missing. Our current implementation handles this in a naive fashion by forcing the controller to individually send the notification to children of the failed nodes. As part of future work, we plan to enhance the tree structure to a fault-tolerant topology, such as the Binomial Graph (BMG) as described in the work of Angskun et al.24 This strategy avoids expensive consensus algorithms by assuming that the controller process is available and failure free. This assumption is not unreasonable as loss of the controller node is generally considered a catastrophic failure for the entire cluster. In fact, many modern resourcemanagers usemultiple hot-spares of the controller node with shared state to ensure that a backup can take over in case the primary controller goes down. Recovery from Node Failures. Recovery from Node failures is similar to recovery from multi-process failures with some additional steps. When a node failure is detected by the controller, the controller replaces the failed nodes by spare nodes. Spare nodes can be pre-allocated at a job or a cluster level or can be selected at runtime from the free nodes. The controller then requests the daemon on the replacement nodes to launch the replacement processes. This requires the controller to send the full execution environment to the replacement node. In SLURM, we achieve this by caching the launch request messages sent during the job launch until the job is complete. The controller also informs other daemons about the replacement node, and the hierarchical tree between the daemons is rebuilt. Note that only daemons whose parent or one of the children had failed are required to participate in the rebuilding procedure. The right part of Figure 4 shows the steps involved in node failures.

### 3.2. Modifications to MVAPICH2

Besides registering a signal handler to listen for failure notifications from the resource manager, theMPI library requires several other modifications to co-operate with the resource manager and ensure proper recovery. Figure 5 shows the steps involved in reinitializing MVAPICH2.

FIGURE 5 Steps in MVAPICH2 to reinitialize MPI

Reinitialization of MVAPICH2. Upon receiving a failure notification, the library enters the recovery phase by using a longjmp instruction and waits for other survivor processes to receive the notification and initiate recovery. This is ensured by using an out-of-band barrier, which we imple ment using the Process-Management Interface (PMI).25 A regular MPI barrier cannot be used due to the presence of failed processes. The MPI library then resets its own state, which includes tearing down connections, resetting communication channels, cleaning up pending or unexpected messages, releasing shared memory channels, and reinitializing global variables. After that, the library performs the regular MPI initialization steps. The functionality mentioned above is equivalent to performing an MPI_Finalize followed by MPI_Init. However, our approach is opti mized for failure recovery since we skip several redundant steps such as closing and re-opening the Host Channel Adapter (HCA) of high-speed interconnects and unregistering and re-registering memory. During reinitialization, the surviving processes must fetch the new network addresses/remote endpoint information from the replacement pro cesses to establish connections. These addresses, however, remain unchanged for the surviving processes themselves. The surviving processes do not need to republish their own network addresses as those are already cached by the node-level daemons. The replacement processes publish their new addresses and fetch other's addresses from their nearest daemons. Previous research works26,27 have shown that this address exchange is one of the major bottlenecks in initializing MPI. This optimization minimizes the amount of information exchanged to improve the recovery time. Ensuring Correctness of the Application. During the failure-free execution, the application pushes and pops cleanup handlers, which are main tained in a stack. While reinitializing MPI, the library pops any remaining handlers from the stack and executes them one by one. These cleanup handlers can be used to release any resources held by the application and cannot include calls to any MPI functions.

## 4. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION

In this section, we evaluate the performance and scalability of EREINIT. First, we compare the time to reinitialize MPI from different types of fail ures with EREINIT and existing approaches. Second, we show recovery time of three HPC bulk synchronous programs with different checkpoint strategies, to show the applicability and benefits of EREINIT. Experimental Setup. All experiments are performed on a 1,296 node cluster with 1,118 compute nodes. Each node is equipped with two Intel Xeon E5-2670 processors (16 cores per node) and 30 GB of RAM. The nodes were connected using QLogic InfiniBand QDR cards with a bandwidth of up to 40 Gbps and Gigabit Ethernet. The operating system on the system was RHEL-6.8 and gcc-4.9.2 was used as the compiler. We used the MVAPICH2-2.2b MPI library and SLURM-15.08.1 to implement our designs. All experiments were performed in full subscription mode. Average of 5 runs are reported to reduce the impact of system noise. Baseline Global Restart. As a comparison point for EREINIT we use Fenix as it implements a global-restart model that is very similar to ours. However, Fenix performs the fault-tolerance primitives at the MPI layer using ULFM. Fenix was initially published in the work of Gamell et al,3 and a subsequent version was published.28 However, it implements a different model (local recovery); thus, it is not suitable as a comparison point. We contacted the authors of Fenix to obtain its source code. However, they kindly informed us that the code, as presented in the aforementioned work,3 is closed. They also informed us that a newer work-in-progress version has been publicly released.29 However, at the time of writing this paper, its recovery API was not fully functional and we were unable to use it for our experiments. To overcome these issues, we implemented the key components of Fenix as presented in the work of Gamell et al3 using the latest public version of ULFM (v1.1, r5433807) available for OpenMPI and used it as a comparison point for EREINIT in the rest of the paper. We call our implementation of Fenix, BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART. All other designs were implemented in MVAPICH2-2.2b and SLURM-15.08.1. Our BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART implementation involves the following steps for failure recovery (see the work of Gamell et al3 for more details):

1. Revoking and shrinking communicators with ULFM
2. Spawning a process to replace a failed process using MPI_Comm_spawn
3. Merging the communicators to fix MPI_COMM_WORLD
4. Operations for rank reassignment (eg, split)

0 1

32 64 128 256 512 1K 2K 4K

Number of Processes in Job

Job Restart Baseline Global Restart EReinit

32 128 1K 4K

FIGURE 6 Recovery time from single-process failure with JOB-RESTART, BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART using Spawn+Merge and EREINIT 4.1 MPI Reinitialization

We compare the time to recover from a failure in EREINIT to the corresponding time in BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART. For this, we create a synthetic benchmark, in which a randomly selected “victim” process sends a timestamp to the root and exits with an error. This initiates the recovery process where all surviving processes are reinitialized and the failed process is restarted. Once the control is returned to the application (after MPI_Init), another timestamp is taken by each process and the maximum difference with the initial timestamp is recorded as the time to recover from a failure. Job-Restart Approach. As a comparison point for EREINIT and BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART, we use the JOB-RESTART approach for failure recovery, in which a new MPI job is submitted upon a failure. We use this comparison point since this approach represents common practice in today's systems for bulk synchronous applications. In our experiments, we measure the time between the failure injection and MPI reini tialization (ie, after MPI_Init). This time includes the time to re-launch the MPI job (eg, via mpirun or srun in Slurm) but does not include allocation time. To represent the best recovery time achievable with this approach, we assume that spare nodes are preallocated when the job is launched. Limitations. A limitation of our evaluation is the possible differences in performance that two distinct MPI libraries may yield: EREINIT is imple mented in MVAPICH, whereas BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART is implemented on top of ULFM, which is implemented in Open MPI. Unfortunately, because there is no full instantiation of ULFM in MVAPICH, we cannot evaluate BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART on top of MVAPICH. To reduce the effect of this limitation, we do not include communication calls, such as collectives, in our re-initialization measurements and only consider the re-initialization steps.We also make sure that ULFM is optimally configured and tuned for our system, so that we can extract the best measurements from it. We believe that despite these limitations, our evaluation allows us to reliably assess the benefits of EREINIT. Single Process Failure. Figure 6 shows recovery time with different approaches after a single process fails at different job sizes. In this scenario, the victim process is killed, but the node-level daemons are not affected. As the number of processes increases, recovery time for BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART and JOB-RESTART increases quickly, while EREINIT shows better scalability. EREINIT avoids the most expensive steps in BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART: agreement and spawning the replacement process. Compared to JOB-RESTART, EREINIT significantly reduces the communication over head required to resume MPI communication and also avoids a number of static costs. With 4,096 processes on 256 nodes, EREINIT recovers from a process failure in 2.25 seconds, outperforming BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART by 58 times and JOB-RESTART by 2.69 times. Multiple Process Failure. In Figure 7, we explore the performance of the approaches when increasing the number of processes that are killed simultaneously, for a fixed job size of 2,048 processes. In our experiments, while EREINIT survived 128 simultaneous failures, BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART could handle only up to 32 simultaneous failures. § As the number of failures increases, the time taken by JOB-RESTART does not increase significantly as the amount of work required stays relatively constant. On the other hand, more failures increase EREINIT's communication cost and recovery time. However, the worst-case recovery time for EREINIT (when all processes fail) is expected to be the same as JOB-RESTART. With 128 concurrent failures, recovery time with EREINIT was 1.98 times faster than JOB-RESTART. Node Failure. Figure 8 shows the results for the single-node failure scenario. This is an important case because node failures are one of the most common failures in HPC systems.30 Here, the node-level daemon is killed along with all the MPI processes on a victim node. As current versions of ULFM do not tolerate node failures, we only compare JOB-RESTART and EREINIT. For both approaches, we pre-allocated a spare node during launch ing the job to avoid any variability from trying to find a replacement node after failure. This spare node was used to spawn the replacement processes. With 256 nodes (2,048 processes), recovery time for EREINIT was 4.41 seconds, 3.14 times faster than JOB-RESTART. Current implementation of EREINIT does not support multiple concurrent node failures. We plan to support and evaluate this feature in the future.

§With a higher number of simultaneous failures, ULFM crashes unexpectedly and BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART cannot continue repairing MPI state. We reported this issue to ULFM developers, but the root cause has not been determined yet.

0

1 2 4 8 16 32 64 128

Number of Failed Processes

Job Restart Baseline Global Restart EReinit

1 2 4 8 16 32

FIGURE 7 Recovery time from multi-process failure with JOB-RESTART, BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART using Spawn+Merge, and EREINIT 0 2 4 6 8

10

12

14

2 4 8 16 32 64 128 256

Number of Nodes

Job Restart EReinit

FIGURE 8 Recovery time from single-node failure with JOB-RESTART and EREINIT

### 4.2. Application checkpoint/restart

We demonstrate the performance of EREINIT in three HPC bulk synchronous programs. The global-restart model requires applications to store and load checkpoints of application data. As the JOB-RESTART approach restarts all the processes and discards any state, these checkpoints must be stored in stable storage that can survive process and node failures. Traditionally, parallel filesystems have been used as the stable storage and we use this as our baseline (JOB-RESTART) in Figures 9, 10, and 11. EREINIT supports this technique as well and is marked as EREINIT + PVFS. However, EREINIT enables a faster technique of storing and loading checkpoints. As the survivor processes are not restarted, they can retain some state after recovery. Consequently, in-memory checkpoints, where each process stores the checkpoint in the memory of a neighboring process can be used. This approach is shown as EREINIT + In-mem in Figures 9, 10, and 11. For this evaluation, we use a simple scheme where the process with rank r sends its checkpoint to the rank (r + ppn)mod Nprocs, where Nprocs is the number of processes in the job and ppn is the number of processes per node. This strategy reduces the amount of memory required to save the checkpoints. However, many different strategies have been proposed in the literature31,32 to store multiple checkpoints on different nodes to improve the resiliency at the cost of more communication and memory consumption. Enzo. Enzo16 is an adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) grid-based code performing hydrodynamics and N-Body calculations to simulate cosmo logical structure formation. Enzo performs periodic checkpoints to the parallel file-system for fault-tolerance and we chose this as our baseline.

16

20

32 64 128 256 512 1K 2K 4K

Number of Processes

Job Restart EReinit+PVFS EReinit+In-Mem

FIGURE 9 Recovery time from process failure in Enzo using JOB-RESTART, EREINIT with parallel file-system, and EREINIT with in-memory checkpoints 0

32 64 128 256 512 1K 2K 4K

Number of Processes

Job Restart EReinit+PVFS EReinit+In-Mem

FIGURE 10 Recovery time from process failure in Lulesh using JOB-RESTART, EREINIT with parallel file-system, and EREINIT with in-memory checkpoints 0 2 4 6 8

10

12

32 64 128 256 512 1K 2K

Number of Processes

Job Restart EReinit+PVFS EReinit+In-Mem

FIGURE 11 Recovery time from process failure in CoMD using JOB-RESTART, EREINIT with parallel file-system, and EREINIT with in-memory checkpoints

Figure 9 shows that the basic JOB-RESTART approach places a significant load on the parallel file system during recovery as the number of processes increases, which is clearly visible with more than 512 processes. EREINIT reduces the recovery time but is similarly bottlenecked by the file-system performance. Adding in-memory checkpoints, the load on the parallel filesystem can be avoided and much better scaling can be achieved.With 4,096 processes, EREINIT + PVFS was 25% faster, while EREINIT + In-mem showed 4 times improvement over JOB-RESTART. Lulesh. Lulesh17 is amini-application that performs a hydrodynamics stencil calculation andmodels the behavior ofmany applications likeALE3D. The fault-tolerant version of Lulesh using checkpoint-restart33 was used as the baseline and compared against the modified version using EREINIT. Figure 10 shows that basic EREINIT is nearly 30% faster while loading checkpoints using EREINIT + In-memory performs 3.7 times better than JOB-RESTART. CoMD. CoMD18 is a proxy-app for a broad class of molecular dynamics simulations. The public release of CoMD does not have checkpoint-restart support and was added by the authors. Compared to JOB-RESTART, EREINIT with in-memory checkpoints resulted in 2.34 times improvement on 2,048 processes (see Figure 11).

### 4.3. Discussion

Performance Difference Between EREINIT and JOB-RESTART. The faster recovery time with EREINIT compared to JOB-RESTART can be attributed to two factors. During JOB-RESTART,MPI_Finalize is followed by a completeMPI_Init procedure. However, EREINIT allows partial finalization and ini tialization by avoiding operations, such as closing/opening the HCA engine and registering memory. These costs are relatively constant with respect to the number of processes. Another significant improvement comes from reducing the time spent in exchanging network address over PMI—the PMI exchange is one of the major costs in MPI_Init, specially at large scale. JOB-RESTART requires all processes to perform a complete PMI exchange. However, in EREINIT, only the address of the restarted processes changes. Thus, only a small number of addresses need to be broadcast—the addresses for the surviving processes are already cached at the node manager of the same node (in case of process failures) or the surviving ances tor node (in case of node failure). Thus, the replacement processes can fetch these addresses quickly with minimal communication overhead. The improvement from the optimized PMI exchange is higher when larger number of processes are involved. Figure 12 shows a breakdown of time spent in various operations inside MPI_Init at different process counts. The expected improvement by eliminating the costs mentioned here matches the observed results shown in Figure 6.

512 1K 2K 4K

T im e

Number of Processes

PMI Exchange Memory Registration Opening HCA Other

0 0.5

1 1.5

2 2.5 3.5 16 32 64 128 256

FIGURE 12 Time taken by different operations during MPI_Init in MVAPICH2. EREINIT eliminates HCA open, Memory Registration and reduces the cost of PMI Exchange 2K

T im e

Number of Processes

Spawn Split Merge Shrink Revoke Agree

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100 16 32 64 128 256 512 1K

FIGURE 13 Time of different operations during recovery in BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART. While spawning replacement processes is the major bottleneck, shrinking and revoking communicators are also expensive compared to recovery

Performance Difference Between EREINIT and BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART. To analyze the difference of performance between EREINIT and BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART, we looked at the time spent in the individual operations performed inside BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART. As shown in Figure 13, BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART spent most time in the MPI_Comm_spawn operation. Performance of spawn has been known to be poor in different MPI libraries.34,35 With better implementation of spawn, recovery time of BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART would be significantly lower. It is also possible for BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART to avoid spawn by using preallocated spare processes and giving a subcommunica tor as MPI_COMM_WORLD to the application. In such an implementation, performance of BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART is comparable to that of EREINIT. However, while this approach works for process failures, mitigating node-failures is still a challenge. Our approach of utilizing the resource manager for procuring replacement resources provides a clean separation of responsibilities and can easily handle both node and process failures. Overhead on Failure-free Execution. BASELINE GLOBAL RESTART relies on ULFM to detect process failures. ULFM provides different APIs (eg, error checking, agreement) to the application for this purpose. The application needs to periodically invoke these APIs to detect a failure and initi ate recovery, which can impose significant overhead even on failure-free executions. Contrary to this, EREINIT does not perform any error checking, agreement, or similar functions in the application. Instead, it relies on the existing error detection performed by the resource manager. Thus, execu tion time for failure-free executions remains the same. For process failures, there is no overhead as the parent process is notified by the operating system when a child process exits abnormally. For detecting node failures, the controller has to periodically ping each node. However, this over head is minimal as on most HPC clusters, these messages go over the management interconnect (generally Ethernet) and not the high-performance interconnect (such as InfiniBand) used by the application. In addition, since this functionality is already present in most modern resource managers, EREINIT does not introduce any new overhead. Configurable QoS. EREINIT supports multiple different recovery modes from a node failure: (a) spare nodes can be pre-allocated when launching the job, (b) the resource manager can be configured to maintain a pool of spare nodes for the entire cluster, or (c) it can simply try to find nodes that are idle during the failure—if a spare node cannot be located, the job is terminated. Our approach also enables more complex rules, which could take into account other factors, such as the job's priority and remaining time. We plan to do a thorough evaluation of the efficacy of these different methods on common HPC cluster workloads as a future work.

## 5. RELATED WORK

Application- and System-level checkpoint/restart. Application-level checkpoint/restart is a popular way to achieve fault-tolerance in bulk-synchronous applications; thus, researchers have looked at improving different aspects of this approach.36-42 Various designs such as coordi nated/uncoordinated and blocking/non-blocking protocols have been explored to ensure that consistent set of checkpoints are saved.43-46 A number of system-level FT techniques have been proposed for MPI, including process replication,47 system-level C/R,36,48,49 and message logging.50-52 Algorithm-based fault tolerance. Algorithm-based fault tolerance53 has been studied in the past for general computing problems. This concept has then been implemented in several fault-tolerance algorithms for high-performance computing such as in other works.54-57 A practical adoption of this technique requires strong cohesion from the underlying parallel programming models. To support effective fault tolerant applications and algorithms, FT programming models that allow to transparently reason about failures and recovery mechanisms are required. Heroux58 studies in depth different mechanisms for application-level fault tolerance provisioning. Fault-tolerant loops. The idea of fault-tolerant loops has been proposed to allow programmers of HPC codes to make the main computation loops fault tolerant.4 This model assumes that most HPC applications are composed of a number of loops. To perform recovery of MPI state such as replacing failed processes and repairing communicators, themodel relies on other components such as the runtime system or resourcemanager. The level of reliance on such components varies deepening on the model implementations. In any case, once a failure is detected, a loop is reinitialized from a previous iteration. To support this, this model makes extensive use of application-level checkpoint/restart. Teranishi and Heroux8 shows how loops can be protected using this concept in a parallel finite element code. User-level FT in MPI. Several methods have been proposed for user-level fault-tolerance in MPI applications: HARNESS,6 FT-MPI,5 ULFM,11 MPICH-V,59 Fenix,3 and Reinit.10 However, none of them have been adopted in the MPI standard yet. Local Failure Local Recovery8 is a fault tolerant library that permits local recovery to keep all remaining processes alive and continue execution. This model is suited for certain type of MPI appli cations, such as those that include master/slave structure; however it does not allow to recover consistently bulk synchronous applications. Fenix3 is an implementation of the global-restart model, which employs ULFM11 to recover MPI state by repairing damaged communicators via the PMPI interface, and application state by a checkpoint/restart approach. A similar strategy was used by Bland et al12 to use ULFM for non-shrinking recov ery in a Monte-Carlo simulation mini application (MCCK). Our work avoids the overhead incurred by these approaches by taking advantage of the resource manager to replace lost processes and nodes instead of relying on expensive operations like shrink, revoke, spawn or merge, which have been implemented so far fully on top of MPI.

## 6. CONCLUSION

Although the global-restart model has emerged as a simple solution to transparently recover bulk-synchronous MPI applications from failures, current instantiations of the model can be made more efficient by co-designing them between MPI and resource managers. In this paper, we present EREINIT, which addresses the efficiency, scalability, and PMPI-constraint problems of existing global-restart implementations by placing failure detection, propagation, and recovery primitives in a resource manager, as opposed to placing them completely in MPI. Through failure injec tion experiments, we demonstrate that EREINIT is faster and handles more concurrent failures compared to state-of-the-art instantiations of the global-restart model. We also evaluated EREINIT up to 4,096 processes with three representative bulk-synchronous applications and showed that it is up to 4 times faster than Job-Restart, the most common approach for fault-tolerance in these applications.

## Acknowledgments

This research is supported in part by National Science Foundation grants #CCF-1565414, #CNS-1419123, #CNS-1513120, #ACI-1450440, and #IIS-1447804. This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under contract DEAC52-07NA27344(LLNL-CONF-706037).

## References

1. Cappello F, Geist A, Gropp B, Kale L, Kramer B, Snir M. Toward exascale resilience. Int J High Perform Comput Appl. 2009;23(4):374-388.

2. Hassani A, Skjellum A, Brightwell R. Design and evaluation of FA-MPI, a transactional resilience scheme for non-blocking MPI. Paper presented at: 44th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks; 2014; Atlanta, GA.

3. Gamell M, Katz DS, Kolla H, Chen J, Klasky S, Parashar M. Exploring automatic, online failure recovery for scientific applications at extreme scales. In: Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis; 2014; New Orleans, LA.

4. Sato K, Moody A, Mohror K, et al. FMI: fault tolerant messaging interface for fast and transparent recovery. Paper presented at: IEEE 28th International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium; 2014; Phoenix, AZ.

5. Fagg GE, Dongarra JJ. FT-MPI: fault tolerant MPI, supporting dynamic applications in a dynamic world. Recent Advances in Parallel Virtual Machine and Message Passing Interface: 7th European PVM/MPI Users' Group Meeting Balatonfüred, Hungary, September 10-13, 2000 Proceedings. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg; 2000:346-353.

6. Fagg GE, Bukovsky A, Dongarra JJ. HARNESS And fault tolerant MPI. Parallel Comput. 2001;27(11):1479-1495.

7. Fang A, Laguna I, Sato K, Islam T, Mohror K. Fault tolerance assistant (FTA): an exception handling approach for MPI programs. In: Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Exascale MPI (at SC15); 2015; Austin, TX.

8. Teranishi K, Heroux MA. Toward local failure local recovery resilience model using MPI-ULFM. In: Proceedings of the 21st European MPI Users' Group Meeting; 2014; Kyoto, Japan.

9. Laguna I, Gamblin T, Mohror K, Schulz M, Pritchard H, Davis N. A global exception fault tolerance model for MPI. Paper presented at: Workshop on Exascale MPI at Supercomputing Conference (ExaMPI); 2014; New Orleans, LA.

10. Laguna I, Richards DF, Gamblin T, et al. Evaluating and extending user-level fault tolerance in MPI applications. Int J High Perform Comput Appl. 2016;30(3):305-319.

11. Bland W, Bouteiller A, Herault T, Hursey J, Bosilca G, Dongarra JJ. An evaluation of user-level failure mitigation support in MPI. Computing. 2013;95(12):1171-1184.

12. Bland W, Raffenetti K, Balaji P. Simplifying the recovery model of user-level failure mitigation. In: Proceedings of the 2014 Workshop on Exascale MPI (ExaMPI); 2014; New Orleans, LA.

## 13. Valiant LG

A bridging model for parallel computation. Commun ACM. 1990;33(8):103-111.

## 14. MVAPICH2

MPI over InfiniBand, 10GigE/iWARP and RoCE: Network-Based Computing Laboratory website. 2001. http://mvapich.cse.ohio-state.edu/ 15. Yoo AB, Jette MA, Grondona M. Slurm: simple Linux utility for resource management. In: Job Scheduling Strategies for Parallel Processing: 9th International Workshop, JSSPP 2003, Seattle, WA, USA, June 24, 2003. Revised Paper. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg; 2003:44-60. 16. O'shea BW, Bryan G, Bordner J, et al. Introducing Enzo, an AMR cosmology application. In: Adaptive Mesh Refinement - Theory Applications. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg; 2005:341-349. 17. Karlin I, Bhatele A, Keasler J, et al. Exploring traditional and emerging parallel programming models using a proxy application. Paper presented at: IEEE 27th International Symposium on Parallel and Distributed Processing; 2013; Boston, MA.

## 18. Mohd-Yusof J

Codesign molecular dynamics (coMD) proxy app. LA-UR-12-21782. Los Alamos, NM: Los Alamos National Lab; 2012. 19. Israel K, Krishna CM. Fault-Tolerant Systems. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann; 2010. 20. Schulz M, De Supinski BR. PNMPI tools: a whole lot greater than the sum of their parts. In: Proceedings of the 2007 ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing; 2007; Reno, NV. 21. Gabriel E, Fagg GE, Bosilca G, et al. Open MPI: goals, concept, and design of a next generation MPI implementation. Recent Advances in Parallel Virtual Machine and Message Passing Interface: 11th European PVM/MPI Users' Group Meeting Budapest, Hungary, September 19 - 22, 2004. Proceedings. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg; 2004:97-104. 22. Castain RH,Woodall TS, Daniel DJ, Squyres JM, Barrett B, Fagg GE. The open run-time environment (openRTE): a transparent multi-cluster environment for high-performance computing. European Parallel Virtual Machine/Message Passing Interface Users' Group Meeting: 12th European PVM/MPI Users' Group Meeting Sorrento, Italy, September 18-21, 2005. Proceedings. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg; 2005:225-232. 23. Bosilca G, Bouteiller A, Guermouche A, et al. Failure detection and propagation in HPC systems. In: Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis; 2016; Salt Lake City, UT. 24. Angskun T, Bosilca G, Dongarra J. Binomial graph a scalable and fault-tolerant logical network topology. Parallel and Distributed Processing and Applica tions: 5th International Symposium, ISPA 2007 Niagara Falls, Canada, August 29-31, 2007 Proceedings. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg; 2007:471-482. 25. Balaji P, Buntinas D, Goodell D, et al. PMI: a scalable parallel process-management interface for extreme-scale systems. Recent Advances in the Mes sage Passing Interface: 17th European MPI Users' Group Meeting, EuroMPI 2010, Stuttgart, Germany, September 12-15, 2010. Proceedings. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg; 2010:31-41. 26. Chakraborty S, Subramoni H, Perkins J, Moody A, Arnold M, Panda DK. PMI extensions for scalable MPI startup. In: Proceedings of the 21st European MPI Users' Group Meeting; 2014; Kyoto, Japan. 27. Chakraborty S, Subramoni H, Moody A, Venkatesh A, Perkins J, Panda DK. Non-blocking PMI extensions for fast MPI startup. Paper presented at: 15th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing (CCGrid); 2015; Shenzhen, China. 28. Gamell M, Teranishi K, Heroux MA, et al. Local recovery and failure masking for stencil-based applications at extreme scales. In: Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis; 2015; Austin, TX. 29. Gamell M, Teranishi K. Fenix Source Code. 2016. https://github.com/epizon-project/Fenix2016 30. Moody A, Bronevetsky G, Mohror K, De Supinski BR. Design, modeling and evaluation of a scalable multi-level checkpointing system. In: Proceedings of the 2010 ACM/IEEE International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis; 2010; New Orleans, LA. 31. Egwutuoha IP, Levy D, Selic B, Chen S. A survey of fault tolerance mechanisms and checkpoint/restart implementations for high performance computing systems. J Supercomput. 2013;65(3):1302-1326. 32. Chen Z, Fagg GE, Gabriel E, et al. Building fault survivable MPI programs with FT-MPI using diskless checkpointing. In: Proceedings of the 2005 ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming; 2005; Chicago, IL.

## 33. Laboratory Lawrence Livermore National. Livermore Unstructured Lagrangian Explicit Shock Hydrodynamics (LULESH)

2010. http://codesign.llnl.gov/ lulesh.php2013 34. Gangadharappa T, Koop M, Panda DK. Designing and evaluating MPI-2 dynamic process management support for infiniBand. Paper presented at: International Conference on Parallel Processing Workshops; 2009; Vienna, Austria. 35. Cera MC, Pezzi GP, Mathias EN, Maillard N, Navaux POA. Improving the dynamic creation of processes in MPI-2. Recent Advances in Parallel Virtual Machine and Message Passing Interface: 13th European PVM/MPI User's Group Meeting Bonn, Germany, September 17-20, 2006 Proceedings. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg; 2006.

36. Hursey J, Squyres JM, Mattox TI, Lumsdaine A. The design and implementation of checkpoint/restart process fault tolerance for open MPI. Paper presented at: IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium; 2007; Rome, Italy. 37. Hursey J, Mattox TI, Lumsdaine A. Interconnect agnostic checkpoint/restart in open MPI. In: Proceedings of the 18th ACM International Symposium on High Performance Distributed Computing; 2009; Garching, Germany. 38. Sankaran S, Squyres JM, Barrett B, et al. The LAM/MPI checkpoint/restart framework: system-initiated checkpointing. Int J High Perform Comput Appl. 2005;19(4):479-493. 39. Moody A, Bronevetsky G, Mohror K, De Supinski BR. Design, modeling, and evaluation of a scalable multi-level checkpointing system. In: Proceedings of the 2010 ACM/IEEE International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis; 2010; New Orleans, LA. 40. Li K, Naughton JF, Plank JS. Low-latency, concurrent checkpointing for parallel programs. IEEE Trans Parallel Distrib Syst. 1994;5(8):874-879. 41. Walters JP, Chaudhary V. Replication-based fault tolerance for MPI applications. IEEE Trans Parallel Distrib Syst. 2009;20(7):997-1010. 42. Chandrasekar RR, Venkatesh A, Hamidouche K, Panda DK. Power-check: an energy-efficient checkpointing framework for HPC clusters. Paper pre sented at: 15th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing; 2015; Shenzhen, China. 43. Elnozahy EN(Mootaz), Alvisi L, Wang Y-M, Johnson DB. A survey of rollback-recovery protocols in message-passing systems. ACM Comput Surv. 2002;34(3):375-408. 44. Lemarinier P, Bouteiller A, Krawezik G, Cappello F. Coordinated checkpoint versus message log for fault tolerant MPI. Int J High Perform Comput Netw. 2004;2(2-4):146-155. 45. Chandy KM, Lamport L. Distributed snapshots: determining global states of distributed systems. ACM Trans Comput Syst. 1985;3(1):63-75. 46. Coti C, Herault T, Lemarinier P, et al. Blocking vs. non-blocking coordinated checkpointing for large-scale fault tolerant MPI. In: Proceedings of the 2006 ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing; 2006; Tampa, FL. 47. Ferreira K, Stearley J, Laros III JH, et al. Evaluating the viability of process replication reliability for exascale systems. In: Proceedings of 2011 International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis; 2011; Seattle, Washington. 48. Hargrove PH, Duell JC. Berkeley lab checkpoint/restart (BLCR) for Linux clusters. J Phys Conf Ser. 2006;46(1):494. 49. Plank JS, Beck M, Kingsley G, Li K. Libckpt: transparent checkpointing under UNIX: In: Proceedings of the USENIX 1995 Technical Conference Proceedings; 1994; New Orleans, LA.

## 50. Ahn J

2-step algorithm for enhancing effectiveness of sender-based message logging. In: Proceedings of the 2007 Spring Simulation Multiconference-Volume 2; 2007; Norfolk, Virginia. 51. Johnson DB, Zwaenepoel W. Recovery in distributed systems using asynchronous message logging and checkpointing. In: Proceedings of the Seventh Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing; 1988; Toronto, Canada. 52. Lemarinier P, Bouteiller A, Herault T, Krawezik G, Cappello F. Improved message logging versus improved coordinated checkpointing for fault tolerant MPI. Paper presented at: IEEE International Conference on Cluster Computing; 2004; San Diego, CA. 53. Huang K-H, Abraham JA. Algorithm-based fault tolerance for matrix operations. IEEE Trans Comput. 1984;C-33(6):518-528. 54. Luk FT, Park H. An analysis of algorithm-based fault tolerance techniques. J Parallel Distrib Comput. 1988;5(2):172-184. 55. Li D, Chen Z, Wu P, Vetter JS. Rethinking algorithm-based fault tolerance with a cooperative software-hardware approach. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis; 2013; Denver, CO. 56. Bosilca G, Delmas R, Dongarra J, Langou J. Algorithm-based fault tolerance applied to high performance computing. J Parallel Distrib Comput. 2009;69(4):410-416. 57. Banerjee P, Rahmeh JT, Stunkel C, et al. Algorithm-based fault tolerance on a hypercube multiprocessor. IEEE Trans Comput. 1990;39(9):1132-1145. 58. Heroux MA. Toward resilient algorithms and applications. In: Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Fault-Tolerance for HPC at Extreme Scale; 2013; New York, NY. 59. Bosilca G, Bouteiller A, Cappello F, et al. MPICH-V: toward a scalable fault tolerant MPI for volatile nodes. In: Proceedings of the 2002 ACM/IEEE conference on Supercomputing; 2002; Baltimore, MD.