University of Nevada, Reno

### I/O Throughput Prediction for HPC Applications Using Darshan Logs

A thesis submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Science in Computer Science and Engineering

by

David James Gabriel Jr.

Dr. Engin Arslan, Advisor

May, 2022

© by David James Gabriel Jr All Rights Reserved

#### THE GRADUATE SCHOOL We recommend that the thesis prepared under our supervision by

#### David James Gabriel Jr.

#### Entitled I/O Throughput Prediction for HPC Applications Using Darshan Logs be accepted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of

#### MASTER OF SCIENCE

#### Dr. Engin Arslan, Advisor Dr. Tin Nguyen, Committee Member Dr. Won Cheol Yim, Graduate School Representative David W. Zeh, Ph.D., Dean, Graduate School

May, 2022

i

Abstract

As most High Performance Computing (HPC) applications deal with large vol umes of data, I/O performance is of critical importance to optimize application per formance. Despite having large-scale, high-performance parallel file systems, many applications still suffer from poor I/O performance. Although existing system moni toring tools gather performance statistics, it can be challenging to interpret multidi mensional data, thereby distinguishing normal behavior from abnormal ones. There fore, it is important to derive models that can process I/O statistics gathered by existing monitoring tools. In this thesis, I develop machine learning (ML) models to process file system statistics as reported by Darshan monitoring tool to predict I/O throughput of HPC applications, which then can be compared against the ob served I/O throughput to identify performance issues. By processing Darshan logs of BlueWaters supercomputer, I trained several ML models including Decision Tree, Random Forest, Gradient Boosting Tree, and Deep Neural Network (DNN) using different feature scaling methods. I found that the DNN model outperformed other solutions as it can estimate the throughput of I/O operations within the 16 MB/s range. We believe that this work makes an important contribution to the field by deriving accurate models to process Darshan logs to detect file system performance anomalies (e.g., overloaded metadata server, high resource interference, etc.) that can be tackled in a timely manner to minimize interruptions.

ii

Dedication

I dedicate this thesis to my parents and grandparents, for always encouraging my 
scientific interests. I also dedicate this to the many scientific mentors I’ve had over 
the years, including Dr. Karl Gabriel, Dr. Iyad Obeid, Dr. Engin Arslan, and 
others. I will always be grateful that so many have chosen to invest their time in my 
scientific tutelage. 

iii

Acknowledgments

I would like to thank my advisor Dr. Arslan for the invaluable guidance through out my graduate studies. I would like to thank Dr. Nguyen and Dr. Yim for being committee members. This research is part of the Blue Waters sustained-petascale computing project, which is supported by the National Science Foundation (awards OCI-0725070 and ACI-1238993) the State of Illinois, and as of December, 2019, the National Geospatial Intelligence Agency. Blue Waters is a joint effort of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and its National Center for Supercomputing Applications. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.

iv

## Contents

Abstract i

Dedication ii

Acknowledgments iii

List of Figures v

1 Introduction 1

2 Background and Related Work 5

3 The Data Set 11 
4 Data Analysis and Results 18 
4.1 Data Cleaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18 
4.2 Error Functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 
4.3 Model Settings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 
4.4 Effect of Scaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 
4.5 Global XGB Model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 
4.6 Effect of Removal of Transfers Below a Threshold . . . . . . . . . . . 25 
4.7 Clustering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26 
4.8 Deep Neural Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 
5 Conclusion and Future Work 34 

References 36

Appendices 40

A UNR IRB Application 40

v

## List of Figures

3.1 The end of the header and beginning of the body of the fully extracted 
Darshan log in human-readable text format. The header contains a 
description of key names in the key-value pairs. The body contains 
the majority of the data captured during the log, including information 
about the I/O, and relevant to the job which produced said I/O . . . 12 
3.2 The features encoded in the Darshan logs, which are used for model 
training. There are two modules, the Posix module and the Lustre 
file system module. Each module contains a number of independent 
variables. Additionally, the throughput, which includes Posix bytes 
read, Posix bytes written, and the time for Posix reads, Posix write 
and Posix meta time. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 
3.3 The distribution of the independent features in Darshan logs . . . . . 14 
3.4 Histogram of the throughput values. The throughput is bimodally 
distributed, and the maximum value of the throughput is 2.34 ∗ 10 9 
bytes/s. The minimum value is 0 bytes/s, although specific examples of 
0 bytes/s were not included in the modeling analysis, because these are 
likely the result of data logging errors. The average value of throughput 
is 8.423759 ∗ 10 7 bytes/s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 
3.5 Bytes Read vs. Bytes Written shaded by Throughput. The coloring 
is based on the Log10 value of the throughput, such that 6 on this 
scale, is 10 6 Bytes/s Here we see that throughput varies widely across 
the total volume of data read and written, which have a large span 
of twelve orders of magnitude. We can see there is an area of low 
throughput, defined by 10 7 bytes read and 10 6 bytes written where 
there is a noticeable decrease in throughput. Consider what effect 
this area will have on further subdivisions of this data set based on 
removing jobs with total data transfers below a threshold. . . . . . . 16 
3.6 Read time vs. Write time shaded by Throughput. The coloring is 
based on the Log10 value of the throughput, such that 6 on this scale, 
is 10 6 Bytes/s. Here we see that throughput varies widely across time 
spent reading and writing. There are areas of high and low throughput 
in both read-intensive and write-intensive jobs. There is a noticeable 
area of low throughput among jobs spent above 10 5 seconds writing. 17 

4.1 Comparison between model types, scaling and Darshan module com ponents. Row 5 is an application of the Isakov methods, without clus tering, applied to the global dataset. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22

vi

4.2 Histogram of model predictions (top) compared to true values (bot 
tom), for the global data set XGB model, the second-highest perform 
ing model to consider the whole data set for MAE, as well as other 
metrics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 
4.3 Error histogram of the global XGB model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 
4.4 Bar plot of the feature importances of the global XGB model, the 
second-best performing model overall to consider all the data, judging 
by MAE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 
4.5 Results of removing samples below a certain threshold of total bytes 
transferred in the job, shown for 1MB, 10MB, 100MB, 1GB, 10GB. . 29 
4.6 The Bytes Read vs. Bytes Written plot again from [4.7], but this time 
with file transfers below 100MB total removed. Again, the coloring is 
based on the Log10 value of the throughput, such that 6 on this scale, 
is 10 6 Bytes/s. Compared with [4.7], this clearly removes an area with 
significant variance towards lower throughput. . . . . . . . . . . . . 30 
4.7 Bytes Read vs. Bytes Written shaded by Throughput. The coloring is 
based on the Log10 value of the throughput, such that 6 on this scale, 
is 10 6 Bytes/s Repeated from Chapter 3 for comparison. [ 3 ] . . . . 30 
4.8 Results of clustering the dataset into 3 clusters using K Means, and 
training XGB models on the resultant clusters, average of 3 test train 
splits. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31 
4.9 Predictions of the Clustered model with k=3, shows the Model Predic 
tions Histogram above the Oberserved (true) Values . . . . . . . . . . 31 
4.10 Histogram of the Error of the KMeans Clustered model with k=3. . 31 
4.11 Histogram of the Predictions (top) and True Values (bottom) of the 
DNN, the highest performing model by MAE. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 
4.12 Histogram of the Error of the DNN model. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32 
4.13 Structure of the layers in the Deep Neural Network, which was the best 
overall performing model studied. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33 

## Chapter 1

## Introduction

The history of High Performance Computing (HPC) has focused on providing comput ing systems for resource intensive workloads which are not well supported by typical commercial systems. In this way, HPC solves problems which are unsolvable through any other means. For many decades, Floating Point Operations per Second (FLOPS) was the defacto standard of computing power. As supercomputer processing cores became well optimized, memory bandwidth became important as well as a measure of the performance. This is necessary for a supercomputer to make the best use of core capability by providing high bandwidth between memory and cores needed for many HPC workloads. Now, supercomputers also require high network throughput, as these systems have scaled up beyond what can be run on a single machine. Nec essarily, these clusters of machines are networked, and the network performance can be of critical importance to understanding and optimizing the overall performance of HPC systems under real scientific workloads. Modern HPC benchmarks such as Linpack Top 500 and Green Top 500 which measure overall performance in FLOPS and FLOPS/Watt respectively are commonly used to measure the capability of leading systems in the HPC space [14, 12]. How ever, a single dimension is not a complete measure of a system as complex as an HPC system necessarily is. Nor is maximizing the benchmark used to rank these systems necessarily going to provide the most productivity to various disparate types of sci entific workloads. That is to say, what works for a materials science research team may not work equally well for a cosmological physics research team.

The incredible gains made within HPC performance have shifted a lot of the 
burden of innovation onto the input-output (I/O) systems that are used to receive 
the data necessary for calculation, as well as to write the output of these calculations. 
The nature of the networked I/O is much more difficult to study than a single core’s 
performance, as it is a function of a network with its own complicated graph which 
can even change over time as load changes, and equipment failures happen. The large 
number of paths data can take through the network, the blazing speeds of modern 
HPC I/O systems, and the incredibly wide range of I/O speed, all hinder attempts 
to understand and simplify the complex nature of HPC I/O. As the addition of more 
compute capability can be data starved by slow I/O, understanding of HPC I/O is 
critical to the improvement of HPC performance as the industry moves into exascale 
systems, increasing from the petascale era system data analyzed in this work. 
In this thesis, I present machine learning models to predict the I/O performance 
of HPC applications using Darshan logs. Darshan module is a lightweight instru 
mentation package that scrapes operating system calls and aggregates these into a 
serialized and compressed format, using a minimum of system resources. It is with 
the aims of improving the overall performance of HPC systems on real scientific work 
loads, and to gain a better understanding of the performance of HPC systems with 
which I propose this work. 
The Blue Waters Supercomputer, which is a part of the National Center for 
Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois, was originally built as 
a National Science Foundation (NSF) Track 1 supercomputer and served as such 
beginning in 2012 [7]. This is the highest-ranking category of supercomputers in the 
NSF categorization, of which there is typically a single Track 1 system in operation 
at any time. The Blue Waters system was designed, as was not historically the 
norm, such that its architecture would support high performance for the most diverse 
set of applications possible. Blue Waters was designed and implemented such that 
not only compute-intensive petascale applications could be well supported, but also 
data-intensive and analytical workloads as well. This was something of a paradigm 

shift away from maximizing benchmark performance and towards supporting the real 
needs of scientific research workloads in a wider variety of disciplines. 
Blue Waters is based on the Cray XE6/XK7 platform. Blue Waters consists of 
276 computational cabinets within a 3-Dimensional torus interconnect. The peak 
bidirectional bisectional bandwidth of this HPC compute cluster is anisotropic in 
nature, and is 18.75 GB/s per link in the X and Z dimensions, and 9.375 GB/s 
per link in the Y dimension. The net bisectional bandwidth per dimension is 21.6 
TB/s for X, 10.35 TB/s in the Y, and 20.7 TB/s in the Z dimension. Additionally, 
the Blue Waters supercomputer has a storage system running the Lustre distributed 
file system connected via Infiniband link as well as a 40 GB/s ethernet link. The 
storage subsystem is based on the Cray Sonnexion CS-1600 with over 25 usable PB 
of storage[8]. Given that Blue Waters was designed with high I/O throughput as a 
foundational principle of the system, it is a perfect candidate system to analyze from 
this perspective. 
I present state-of-the-art regression models, which exceed the best performing 
models of the prior works, without the limitations and workarounds implemented in 
these prior works. This is done using approximately 296.0 TB of data, which is likely 
the largest Darshan data set ever analyzed in this manner. Isakov et. al. proposed 
HBDScan clustering along with the Gradient Boosting Tree model to predict I/O 
throughput using Darshan logs and attained 20% prediction accuracy. In order to 
achieve this, the authors removed whose total I/O size is less than 100 MiB [18]. Xie 
et. al. are able to predict write time using a Lasso model and Darshan logs within 30% 
[28]. My approach can achieve 19% accuracy for the entire dataset without removing 
any Darshan logs. I also show that removing logs below a certain threshold reduces 
the performance of the regression task for most machine learning models including 
eXtreme Gradient Boost (XGB) and Decision Tree. Therefore, not only does this work 
represent an increase in overall performance, it does so against a global data set, not 
a data set which has been subsampled in an effort to improve model performance. 
I present several techniques as well as several metrics for evaluation, and compare 

performance across these metrics, showing that rather than being a dominant solution 
that achieves superior performance in all metrics, the choice of metric is important. 
The two best overall models presented are a Deep Neural Network (DNN) which 
displays the best results in terms of Mean Absolute Error (MAE). The DNN is able 
to estimate within 16 MiB range of the actual value, attaining 19% error rate on 
average. The effect of clustering the logs based on total I/O size is also analyzed 
using K-means clustering, but we found that the performance of models is reduced in 
clustered scenarios. The clustering necessarily requires a larger percentage of reserved 
testing data for the train test splits analyzed, and offers no new capabilities as the 
advanced models are able to distinguish between groups of samples and do so in such 
a way as to minimize the model error function. 
The rest of this thesis is structured as follows: Chapter 2 provides background 
knowledge integral to understanding the material of this work. Chapter 3 contains a 
detailed look at the Darshan logs from the Blue Waters system and describes feature 
extraction. Chapter 4 describes the feature scaling and modeling techniques used 
and explores the effects of modeling on subsets and clusters of data. Finally, the 
conclusion and future work are contained in Chapter 5. 

## Chapter 2

## Background and Related Work

The pace of performance increase in file systems is lagging behind the performance increase rate of compute resources, necessitating researchers to extensively study the I/O behavior of HPC applications and propose a wide range of solutions to monitor and optimize it [4, 5, 17, 2, 6, 15, 25, 29]. Most notably, Darshan HPC I/O Charac terization tool, a lightweight instrumentation module, gathers performance statistics for I/O operations in HPC systems [9]. It instruments POSIX operating system calls, Message Passing Interface (MPI) calls and logs them for monitoring and analysis. It is designed to be lightweight as to minimally interfere with the system upon which it resides and runs continuously to instrument jobs. It provides useful data for HPC system administrators and architects, as well as for scientific researchers. The Darshan HPC I/O Characterization tool uses persistent logging methodolo gies to record data about HPC I/O, specifically with regard to Portable Operating System Interface (POSIX), MPI as well as file system level I/O, in this case, Lus tre. Statistical metrics from each of these modules are recorded in real-time. The logging module creates a file record for every file opened, and tracks which process is opening the file. Each file record contains a set of counters, to track statistical metrics about the file I/O behavior. The POSIX module, for instance, tracks the number of file reads, writes, opens, seeks, stats, and other such POSIX operations which target files. There are timestamps recorded for open, close, first I/O, and last I/O are recorded in the POSIX module file record. The Darshan tool references the file records from a series of hash tables, as well as caching the last file referenced for

fast lookup. Darshan includes limits to the total file record size, which is stored in 
memory, in order to reduce the overhead on the application being monitored. This 
necessarily leads to a process wherein once the memory limit is exceeded, the detailed 
statistics and data structure stored within the file record are condensed down, written 
to disk, and as the Darshan module rebuilds new file records. This flushing out of 
the file record counter data in memory leads to records with periodic data from all 
of the counters, such that in order to understand how many times a file was opened, 
one must take the aggregate sum of all of the file open counters from every time the 
records are flushed. However, some of the counters reset to the same, or nearly the 
same value every time, such as the counter number of Object Storage Servers (OSS) 
in the Lustre module. For instance, the number of servers is usually fairly consistent, 
except for an occasional outage. Therefore, some counters are better served by av 
eraging, rather than summing, because a summed OSS counter would reflect more 
information about the rate at which the logging tool exceeded its memory allocation, 
rather than the actual number of available servers. 
Some of the POSIX counters of interest have already been described above. An 
other set of counters used in this analysis is the histogram counters of the number 
of accesses to files within a certain size, the limits being described in Figure 3.2. 
This histogram data is important because larger file accesses tend to have better I/O 
performance, given a better ratio between the overhead of initiating file access vs. 
the time to complete the access, as well as providing more time for network tuning 
algorithms to optimize the larger file accesses. The file histogram is relevant because 
larger files tend to have higher rates of I/O, and have a lower ratio of transfer initial 
ization time to I/O time. Any data which encodes timestamp information was not 
included in the model building feature set. Also, the most common accesses, which 
record the most common types of file accesses and the stride information about these 
accesses, which vary across memory flushes, are challenging to encode into numerical 
features for the modeling steps and were omitted. [9] 
Synder et. al. review refactoring of Darshan codebase for modularity [22]. Added 

to the Darshan logging tool are Memory Map (MMAP) based logging methods, as 
well as Lustre, Standard In and Out (STDIO) interfaces and Blue Gene/Q modules. 
The Darshan Authors describe striping information as critical to understanding I/O 
and tuning performance in Lustre file system-based HPC systems. Detailed analyses 
of Darshan’s lightweight footprint are presented. This includes the decisions to limit 
the total memory usage of the Darshan tool, by flushing counters out of memory once 
a threshold is exceeded, and deferred communication of job statistics until after the 
job is completed. Two case studies are provided, showing new insights gained from 
additional features of Darshan logging tool. 
The Lustre file system, which is a distributed file system used in the Blue Waters 
system, is also instrumented by the Darshan tool. The Lustre metrics were not 
utilized in the prior works reviewed, but are shown to provide useful information 
related to I/O performance [22]. The Lustre module of Darshan records data such 
as the number of servers of data and metadata, the number of files accessed through 
the Lustre interface, the stripe width, file alignment, and more. This information, 
recorded at the distributed file system level, is designed to allow tuning of file system 
parameters for system performance, but also contains information relevant to I/O. In 
the best-performing model for which feature importances were analyzed, the Lustre 
stripe width was shown to be the top contributing Lustre counter. 
In order to better understand and evaluate the I/O of supercomputer systems, 
several papers have proposed Darshan log-based characterization. Isakov et. al. 
propose to use agglomerative clustering to develop Gauge, a real-time monitoring 
tool for the Argonne National Laboratory HPC system using Darshan logs as the 
data source [18]. They apply HBDSCAN agglomerative clustering, in addition to 
explainable local modeling. The authors claim to demonstrate predictions within 
∼20% of throughput. 661,553 Darshan logs are analyzed in the work are collected from 
the Argonne National Laboratory’s Theta supercomputer. The authors also elaborate 
on techniques for pre-processing Darshan logs prior to feature set building. Isakov 
et. al use a pre-processing scheme based on logarithmic and ratiometric percentage 

scaling to reduce the span of the features to a relative scale of which their modeling 
techniques are more tolerant than the raw, unscaled data. 
Isakov et. al. apply HBDScan clustering algorithm to group the data points 
into clusters and build models on these clustered subsets of data. The authors then 
train a single depth decision tree algorithm over the HBDScan algorithm retraining 
the clustering provided by HBDScan into a decision tree. The authors develop a 
dashboard that will display for comparison the model performance of several model 
types on each cluster. The primary modeling is done in Extreme Gradient Boost 
(XGBoost) and is compared with a constant model and a linear model. The authors 
drop any jobs below 100 MiB total data transferred in the job. Additionally, SHAP 
analysis is run on the models, to determine the importance of the features in model 
performance. The use of SHAP algorithm is not strictly necessary to determine the 
importance of features in XGBoost model as the boosted trees produced in this algo 
rithm contain significant information about feature importance in the tree structure 
itself. The SHAP analysis is also remarkably costly, as it requires sub-sampling the 
data set again for each column and retraining the model for every dimension in the 
input data set. Furthermore, the explain-ability of the clustering algorithm, while 
technically valid, is unlikely to yield any optimizations for system operators, as the 
dense number of vertices within the single linkage tree produced by HBDScan contain 
large numbers of heuristics, making optimizing to a specific linkage unlikely, as a large 
number or other linkages would necessarily be affected. Rosario et. al. processed and 
analyzed 89,844 Darshan logs gathered from the Argonne Leadership Computing Fa 
cility (ALCF) Theta supercomputer, over a period of 3 years [13]. The Gauge tool is 
used to analyze this data in a case study, to demonstrate the potential for further sys 
tem optimization gained from insight from Darshan log analysis. The authors show 
how Gauge can be used from the perspective of an HPC facility operator to analyze 
and improve system I/O. 
The authors in Sisneros et. al. use Darshan logs to model the I/O performance 
of the Blue Waters supercomputer, the same which is discussed in this work [21]. The 

authors analyze a series of in the order of around 300 Darshan instrumented jobs and 
demonstrate some level of efficacy within the modeling techniques used. The models 
used are Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Deep Neural Network (DNN). The 
authors claim a Mean Squared Error (MSE) of 0.0073 for the DNN and 0.0116 for the 
SVM model. The units of these MSE values are not elucidated making comparison 
difficult, however, the authors state that there is clearly room for improvement. In this 
work, the models do seem to fit towards the data and the presented results do lay some 
foundation that the techniques used within could be successfully applied to Darshan 
log-based modeling of HPC throughput for Blue Waters. However, the opacity of 
feature selection, pre-processing methods, and scaling of ground truth within the 
model make both replication and comparison difficult. Additionally, relatively few 
Darshan logs are processed compared to other works, such as [18] 
Chien et. al. also use Darshan logs in a modeling experiment, in addition to 
other data sources. The authors use Darshan logs, Autoperf, control system logs, 
Cobalt and Tracklib data sources collected from the Argonne National Laboratory 
Mira supercomputer [19]. The Mira supercomputer is a petascale supercomputer 
system. Interestingly, this work considers which executable is being used in the 
compute job as part of its clustering approach, which is based on XGBoost classifier 
and analyzed with t-Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE). The authors are able 
to classify the job into a category of approximate run time, with the goal of improving 
scheduling efficiency. Because the models are inferring the specific executable of a set 
specific to the Mira supercomputer and determining the amount of buffer to add into 
the scheduled job, direct comparison with this work is challenging. 
Paul et. al. use Darshan to study I/O patterns of Machine Learning (ML) 
workloads, on leadership scale HPC systems [20]. They processed over 23,000 jobs 
and show that ML workloads generate a large number of small file reads and writes 
which is more optimized for BB rather than GPFS. This work specifically segregates 
the job type into ML or non ML, and analyzes the I/O patterns of ML workloads, 
which are recognized as an emerging trend in HPC systems. Xie et. al. analyzed 

Darshan logs from Cetus and Titan, and Summit HPC systems to model write IO performance [28]. The authors achieved prediction accuracy with less than 30% error rate for 98.31% and 100% of jobs in Cetus and Titan systems, respectively. Models used were linear, lasso, ridge, decision tree and random forest. The authors claim the possibility of improving improving I/O by 15% for 70% of jobs using information gained from the developed models. White et. al. processed data from multiple sources, including Darshan using Open XDMoD, collected from the Blue Waters system [26]. A total of 95 TB of data is processed, and the techniques used to collect and process the data into the Open XDMoD system are described in detail. Tipu et. al. created a regression model to predict I/O specifically for petroleum seismology jobs on HPC systems [23]. Of metrics evaluated were Mean Absolute Per cent Error (MAPE), Mean Squared Error (MSE) and Mean Absolute Error (MAE). Prediction accuracy of I/O within this homogeneous workload type was 62.5%-96.5%, looking at MPI I/O only, and used Darshan Lustre module data as well. The authors used an artificial neural network, with 7 input nodes, two hidden layers with 256 and 128 nodes in order from input to output and one output node in the final layer.

## Chapter 3

## The Data Set

Darshan logs used in this work are collected between February 2014 and December 2019. The data is grouped first into a series of directories by month then by day of collection. The total file size of the data set used in this work in its most compressed format is 823.2 GB. A subsection of the data built with the Darshan toolchain version 3 or greater is 287.4 GB, which is the subset used in this work. The decision was made to only use Darshan logs with the same major version, in an attempt to eliminate unnecessary variability from a major version change of the logging toolset. The data set is extremely compressed in the stored and transferable form in which it is received. In order to process the Darshan logs, each tarball must first be extracted, which results in either a “.darshan” file, or another archive, in this case, a “.gz” file, con taining multiple “.darshan” files inside. Extracting continues until all sub-archives are processed and all “.darshan” files are fully extracted. The “.darshan” file is a serialized format which must be processed using the Darshan parser, which can be built from source from the files provided by the Argonne National Laboratory [9]. After compiling the parsing tool, the “.darshan” files are then parsed into a human readable format of plain text. This format is typically much larger than its equivalent fully compressed format, meaning the possibility of exceeding disk space while data is uncompressed is very real, especially when processing the volume of these logs which were necessary for this work. It is this text format that is then scanned by a Python module I wrote, using the Pandas data science library, in chunks of 1,000,000,000 lines at a time. An estimate of the compression ratio made with a pilot sample data size

Figure 3.1: The end of the header and beginning of the body of the fully extracted Darshan log in human-readable text format. The header contains a description of key names in the key-value pairs. The body contains the majority of the data captured during the log, including information about the I/O, and relevant to the job which produced said I/O

of 5 days worth of Darshan log data, shows that the fully uncompressed form is 1,030 times larger than its fully compressed format. While an estimate, this would put the full dataset at 847.9 TB, and the dataset used in this work at 296.0 TB. Certainly, the data processed in this paper represents hundreds of TB in its fully decompressed format. This is three years’ worth of Darshan log data, collected between January 2017, and December 2019. The data within the human-readable text format files, which are the final fully uncompressed form, consist of a header and a body section as shown in Figure 3. The header contains a number of data points, such as the number of processes, ’jobid’, as well as other data about the job. The body consists of eight columns in a tab-delimited text format, organized into modules. The column names are “module”, “rank”, “record id”, “counter”, “value”, “file name”, “mount pt”, and “fs type”. The two most important columns in this set are “counter” and “value”, which represent a key-value pair containing data about the job being instrumented

Figure 3.2: The features encoded in the Darshan logs, which are used for model train ing. There are two modules, the Posix module and the Lustre file system module. Each module contains a number of independent variables. Additionally, the through put, which includes Posix bytes read, Posix bytes written, and the time for Posix reads, Posix write and Posix meta time.

in Darshan. Examples of keys in this paradigm are, “POSIX BYTE READ” and “POSIX BYTE WRITTEN”. These key-value pairs are logged multiple times as POSIX system calls are registered by the logging module to capture the critical infor mation relevant to the I/O patterns of jobs. The keys are not unique, and typically the total bytes written, for instance, would be found across many key-value pairs in this column store format. The features and their range are shown in Figures 3 and 3. To process this volume of data, an highly efficient data processing module was necessary. I implemented a processing script in Python mainly using existing Pandas and Numpy libraries to scan in the data from the text readable form 1,000,000,000 lines at a time, applying a transformation into a Pandas dataframe delimiting upon

Figure 3.3: The distribution of the independent features in Darshan logs the tabs. Then, the keys were scanned by a regular expression to match relevant key sets to the appropriate accumulator variable. By scanning the entire data set, a per job view of each selected key was aggregated into a single file output, representing for instance the total bytes read, bytes written, or a total number of POSIX stat calls made. Some of these keys were averaged, rather than summed, such as the number of metadata servers, which is recorded multiple times but is not a value that is appropriately summed, as the data represents the same set of metadata servers each time. Summing rather than averaging these, would not represent a change in metadata servers, but would rather represent a change in the number of harvest cycles from the logging tool, which always repeated the current value. The Python module itself was designed so that every line of the file was read-only once, and some irrelevant lines were read not at all. Additionally, the file processing followed specific order of extraction, scanning, writing output, and cleanup, and in volved the creation of a set of scripts to automate this processing at a large scale. This work was undertaken on a 1TB drive, and this volume was not exceeded as a result of careful data management within the custom toolchain I developed. Additionally, there were scripts to clean up failed attempts, in the event of a process crashing. I ran these scripts per-directory basis, processing the data month by month using up to eight concurrent threads. This process took about two weeks; gather everything

Figure 3.4: Histogram of the throughput values. The throughput is bimodally dis tributed, and the maximum value of the throughput is 2.34 ∗ 10 9 bytes/s. The mini mum value is 0 bytes/s, although specific examples of 0 bytes/s were not included in the modeling analysis, because these are likely the result of data logging errors. The average value of throughput is 8.423759 ∗ 10 7 bytes/s

into an appropriate output directory, verify that all files were scanned correctly. The final dataset, stored in CSV format with 375 MB in size, includes 875,287 jobs. The final dataset is approximately six orders of magnitude smaller than the fully decompressed data set. This highlights the general scale of the data, and one of the major difficulties in this work is processing such a large volume of data. Such extreme scales are a hallmark of this work, both within the volume of the data processed and within the values contained within said data.

Figure 3.5: Bytes Read vs. Bytes Written shaded by Throughput. The coloring is based on the Log10 value of the throughput, such that 6 on this scale, is 10 6 Bytes/s Here we see that throughput varies widely across the total volume of data read and written, which have a large span of twelve orders of magnitude. We can see there is an area of low throughput, defined by 10 7 bytes read and 10 6 bytes written where there is a noticeable decrease in throughput. Consider what effect this area will have on further subdivisions of this data set based on removing jobs with total data transfers below a threshold.

Figure 3.6: Read time vs. Write time shaded by Throughput. The coloring is based on the Log10 value of the throughput, such that 6 on this scale, is 10 6 Bytes/s. Here we see that throughput varies widely across time spent reading and writing. There are areas of high and low throughput in both read-intensive and write-intensive jobs. There is a noticeable area of low throughput among jobs spent above 10 5 seconds writing.

## Chapter 4

## Data Analysis and Results

### 4.1 Data Cleaning

The raw output of the data scanning tool described in Chapter 3 was a directory con taining comma-separated variable files, each one representing a single job’s Darshan data, aggregated across the header and column store information from the Darshan text output. The first step was to combine these files into one comma-separated variable file. The individual files were scanned into Python’s Pandas library into one single comma separated variable file. Then rows with null values were dropped. Rows with zero throughput were dropped, as these were likely the result of a loss of data in the Darshan logging modules. A recreation was made of the scaling used by Isakov et. al. [18], however this time including the additional Lustre File System metrics. For any runs involving this scaling algorithm, which has the possibility of introducing additional null and infinity values, there is the replacement of null and negative Infinity values with 0, and - 1 respectively, then removing row with positive infinity values. This was necessary because these values are incompatible with the modeling algorithms applied. After applying the data cleaning, 671,063 data points were left in the data set with standard scalar, and 670,931 data points were left af ter the additional cleaning steps were applied for the logarithmic/ratiometric based scaling.

### 4.2 Error Functions

I use four key error functions to present results when evaluating the results of any models used in this work. In this way, a comparative analysis can be made not only of the relative strengths of the models but also of the metrics. Generally, other works looking at Darshan logs to build regression models have not clearly indicated methods of scoring models, as outlined in Chapter 2. Therefore, without a consensus on how to score these regression models of HPC I/O throughput, I used the below four metrics for every model in this work. The definitions used within this work for the error functions are as follows:

Mean Absolute Error (MAE):

MAE = 1 n∗P

n i=1 | ei| (1)

Mean Squared Error (MSE):

MSE = 1 n∗P

n i=1(ei) 2 (2)

Where n is equal to the number of test samples, fi is equal to ground truth value of the dependent variable throughput, yi is equal to predicted value of the dependent variable throughput, ei is equal to the error which is (yi − fi) .The mean of the ob served data is ¯y. The residual Sum of Squares:

SSres =

P

i(yi − fi) 2 =

P

ie 2 i (3)

The total Sum of Squares:

SStot =

P

i(yi − y¯) 2 (4)

The R-Squared value is defined as:

R 2 = 1 −

SSres SStot (5)

Now that we have defined all the error functions used to evaluate the scores of the regression models put forth, let us consider each one. Mean Absolute Error (MAE), despite being the simplest, is a good baseline with which to compare models. Mean Squared Error (MSE), is similar, penalizing large error values. Mean Absolute Per cent Error (MAPE) measures the average error percentage of and treats all Darshan logs equally. R-Squared or R 2 is a more complicated Regression fit algorithm relat ing the sum of squares of the error to the sum of squares of the difference from the mean. R 2 is typically the least preferred measurement metric when trying to max imize performance. We found that R-Squared could be quite good, yet the model didn’t necessarily perform that well on average, in terms of Bytes/s from MAE. MAE tended to be the most reliable means of comparison, as it is not affected by the scale of the error function relative to either the norm or the true value of throughput. It is also in the same units of throughput, namely Bytes/s, which means it is more intuitively understandable. The drawback of MAE in comparison is that it is difficult to compare MAE between datasets from different experiments if the scale of the data varies. For this reason, several authors express their results as MAE/ Mean true value, in terms of percent. In order to account for the variation that is due to occur between splits of the whole data set into to training and testing sets, all results in this work are the average

of at least three runs, with different randomly selected train/test splits. This was chosen with the aim of reducing the likelihood of getting a particularly good or bad result when the underlying method was not as good or bad as the lucky split might indicate. Additionally, all test portions of the test train splits are 10% of the data for global and sub-sampled models, and 40% for clustered models, where the cluster sizes may vary considerably, and require a larger percentage of test data in order to maintain significance. It is a benefit to have a large number of samples, so as not to starve either set. Additionally, by running each evaluation three times, and taking the average of the metrics output, it is less likely that over-fitting within the models will produce a good model result, unfairly skewing to the benefit of the model, which has just learned the noise inherent in a sampling of the data, rather than the underlying characteristic relationship between the independent and dependent variables.

### 4.3 Model Settings

Generally, I compared the same set of three models under a wide variety of condi tions, Linear Regressions Model, eXtreme Gradient Boost (XGB), and Decision Tree models. The Linear Regression models serve as a baseline for comparison mostly. Generally, problems that are well served by Linear Regression are of lesser interest, and this baseline serves for comparison. The XGB models used in sections 4.4 and 4.5 are all of the same types, from the Python XGB library [10], and contain 1,000 estimators each. The XGB models in 4.6, use 10,000 estimators each. All of the XGB configurations are otherwise default settings, which includes MSE error function as its optimization objective. The Decision Tree regressors [27] were configured with a max depth of four. The DNN, which has the most complicated set of hyper-parameters, was simply chosen to balance training time, and performance. The DNN generally reached its best form after 400 epochs, but 1440 epochs were trained in order to en sure stability in the optimization. The error function was set to MAE. This paper is not an attempt to tune the various parameters and hyper-parameters of the various algorithms used, each of which is a complicated topic. However, by using standard

algorithms we demonstrate the basic capability of each one and provide a means for comparison. Although we believe that the selected hyperparameters work well in most settings, we leave detailed hyperparameter optimization as future work.

Figure 4.1: Comparison between model types, scaling and Darshan module compo nents. Row 5 is an application of the Isakov methods, without clustering, applied to the global dataset.

### 4.4 Effect of Scaling

First, the effect of scaling algorithms, which are used to take the raw features, in vari ous units and relative magnitudes, and transform them into machine learning-friendly quantities which are more optimal for creating a mapping between the features and the predictions generated by the regression model. In this work, all features are scaled down dramatically except for the throughput, which is left in raw quantities of Bytes/s. The algorithms used, for the most part, are scale-invariant. Linear re gression, XGB, and Decision tree tend to be scale-invariant, so we will consider what effects the non-linear mappings provided in [18] have over the standard unit variance Gaussian linear mapping.

Figure 4.2: Histogram of model predictions (top) compared to true values (bottom), for the global data set XGB model, the second-highest performing model to consider the whole data set for MAE, as well as other metrics.

The logarithmic scaling as done by Isakov et. al. [18] performed worse than Gaussian unit variance scaling in two different cases, both with and without the Lustre module data. Isakov et. al. used log10 and percent scaling, which does not entirely eliminate scale differences between these columns. In this method, data would span between 0 and 12 for the log10 columns and between 0 and 1 for percent based columns. Therefore, it resolves to within less than an order of magnitude. Additionally, the percent-based scaling combines data from multiple columns, which is a loss of information to the model inputs.

### 4.5 Global XGB Model

The XGB model runs on all data, with standard scaling is one of the best performing models in this work. It has the highest performance on MSE, and also on R-Squared. The feature importance values for this model are shown in Fig. 4.4. The most impor tant columns for XGB models are POSIX bytes and POSIX bytes read between 100 bytes and 1KB. The Lustre file system module features are typically less important,

Figure 4.3: Error histogram of the global XGB model.

although some rank higher than file size histogram data columns. Additionally, we 
can analyze the error histogram, which is rather one-sided, with error distributed in 
the negative range typically. The two best performing models, this and the DNN, 
both have the tendency to underpredict. 
I compared the scaling used in Isakov et. al., which consists of a combination of 
percent scaling of features, and log10 scaling of features, with standard unit variance 
Gaussian scaling. The features which were part of a common set, such as bytes 
read and bytes written, were represented as a percentage of the overall number of 
bytes transferred [18]. These ratio-metric features ranged between 0 and 1. Also, 
there were log10 features, which a logarithmic function served to condense these 
magnitudes considerably, but is also undefined for the input zero, further adding to 
additional data cleaning necessary. Additionally, the difference between the ratio 
metric values, being between 0 and 1, and the log10 values, being between 0 and 
14, did not completely eliminate the magnitude shift between the variables, as is 
intended. 

Figure 4.4: Bar plot of the feature importances of the global XGB model, the second best performing model overall to consider all the data, judging by MAE

### 4.6 Effect of Removal of Transfers Below a Thresh old

Another technique used in Isakov et. al. was examined, which is to drop all jobs with values of total data transferred below 100 MiB [18]. To examine the effect of excluding total data transferred values below a certain threshold, I ran all 3 models with all error scores, resampling the data a total of six times. This resulted in global data set and jobs with data transfers greater than or equal to 1MB, 10MB, 100MB, 1GB, 10GB. Generally, removing jobs below a certain total data transfer size did not have an improvement in MAE. Additionally, comparing with figures [4.6 ][4.7] reveals that removing file transfers below 100MB, removes an area of significant information about low throughput. Rather than eliminate this area, which contains useful information about low throughput transfers, which is what we would ideally like to eliminate, we should model it, and analyze the results.

We can see that just by eliminating values with small throughput values, the XGB model has MAE that is getting worse through the first 3 subsampled data sets, up until 1G threshold when it improves. This would seem to indicate that eliminating small file transfers but does not improve the model’s actual performance. This pattern is not only true of the XGB models, but also the linear model, which shows MAE either staying in the same range or getting worse, up through the 100MB threshold split. Decision tree shows little variation in MAE up to 100 MB threshold. A slight improvement in MAE for decision tree, may indicate that eliminating small file transfers has more effect regarding removing challenging test examples.

### 4.7 Clustering

Using the unit variance Gaussian scaling, I implemented clustering in K-Means, with k = 3. For the clustered models, the test train split was upped to 40% testing to account for the smaller clusters resulting in lower testing sizes for smaller clusters. All data was combined from each cluster and analyzed as a single model. This process was repeated 3 times, and the results shown are the average of 3 for each result. The best clustered result turns out to be worse than XBG on the global dataset. Even with the number of estimators increased to 10,000 estimators, as in the results shown, the global XGB model does better in terms of MAE. The XGB model, which consists of boosted trees, is totally capable of segregating segments of the data within its own decision tree framework. Clustering seems to not particularly benefit the model building, rather it puts more restrictive considerations on not data starving the sub models, such that they do not have either enough data to train the model and enough test data to evaluate the model with significant statistical power. Rather, as long as the model is not starved for estimators, it seems better to let the XGB optimization process handle cases on the global dataset, rather than by clustering data.

### 4.8 Deep Neural Network

I trained a Deep Neural Network (DNN) on the data as a regressor model, which was built using the Keras Python library. [11] The structure of the DNN, which had 34 inputs, one output, and 9 total layers. A full description of the layers is presented in [4.13]. The input layer has 34 inputs, and 128 outputs. Then there are two layers with 256 outputs, three layers with 512 outputs, followed by two layers with 256 outputs, followed by the output layer with one output. The DNN took approximately 1 day to train, using eight cores, and was trained with 1440 epochs, with the best example network occurring on epoch number 288. This model has the best performance in terms of MAE. The network was only run with a single train test split of 90% training data, 10% test data. The DNN has a large number of hyper parameters, such as the number of layers, and the outputs of these layers. Indeed there is no upper bound, as layers can be added arbitrarily, and the cost of evaluating the hyper parameter space is high. It is therefore difficult to find the most optimal DNN configuration, and these results represent a crudely hand optimized configuration. However, the network does outperform XGB for MAE. It also does slightly worse for MSE than the clustered XGB. Overall, the DNN achieved the best results, and exceeded the previous best published results for a complete dataset of HPC jobs by over 10%. Xie et. al. were able to obtain within 30% without subsampling the data from the Titan HPC system.[28] Isakov et. al. claimed to be able to estimate within 20% the throughput, omitting results with total data transfers below 100MiB.[18] Here, I show a DNN, which is able to estimate within 16 MB, a throughput value which is on average 8.423759 ∗ 10 7, equating to being within 19%. I chose not eliminate values being less than 100MiB in this model, and was able to show that for this dataset, this actually did not offer significant performance gains for modeling the complete dataset. The achievement of best in class performance with this crucial small transfer size set of jobs is a breakthrough. Further, by analyzing Fig. 4.6 and Fig. 4.7 we see the

area below 100MB contains jobs with predominantly lower I/O performance than the mean. This indicates that if our goal is to be able to detect or predict sources of worse I/O performance in order to address these, it is preferable to consider these cases. There was little benefit discovered with using another clustering algorithm, K-means, applying it with the best performing techniques from other trials. The reduction of training samples necessary to accommodate the reduced populations of the clusters, is a drawback of this technique. The MAE suffers in the best clustering results examined, and I only present the best results from a much wider array of clustering parameters tested. Additionally, more detail about the actual performance of the model is demon strated, with a less compute intensive analysis than in Isakov et. al.. By using the built in XGB feature importances, the expensive SHAP algorithm is eliminated, while the contribution of individual input dimensions can be considered. Furthermore, the addition of the Lustre dimensions shows the positive effect of the new module, pre viously unconsidered across works analyzing Darshan logs.The Lustre stripe width column for instance, is ranked in the XGB model more highly than several file size histogram columns. Providing further analysis on the DNN model would have been beneficial, however DNN’s are typically more challenging to analyze, and require ad ditional consideration. Running SHAP on the DNN’s would be interesting, but also would require a great deal more time and/or processing power.

Figure 4.5: Results of removing samples below a certain threshold of total bytes transferred in the job, shown for 1MB, 10MB, 100MB, 1GB, 10GB.

Figure 4.6: The Bytes Read vs. Bytes Written plot again from [4.7], but this time with file transfers below 100MB total removed. Again, the coloring is based on the Log10 value of the throughput, such that 6 on this scale, is 10 6 Bytes/s. Compared with [4.7], this clearly removes an area with significant variance towards lower throughput.

Figure 4.7: Bytes Read vs. Bytes Written shaded by Throughput. The coloring is based on the Log10 value of the throughput, such that 6 on this scale, is 10 6 Bytes/s Repeated from Chapter 3 for comparison. [ 3 ]

Figure 4.8: Results of clustering the dataset into 3 clusters using K Means, and training XGB models on the resultant clusters, average of 3 test train splits.

Figure 4.9: Predictions of the Clustered model with k=3, shows the Model Predictions Histogram above the Oberserved (true) Values

Figure 4.10: Histogram of the Error of the KMeans Clustered model with k=3.

Figure 4.11: Histogram of the Predictions (top) and True Values (bottom) of the DNN, the highest performing model by MAE.

Figure 4.12: Histogram of the Error of the DNN model.

Figure 4.13: Structure of the layers in the Deep Neural Network, which was the best overall performing model studied.

## Chapter 5

## Conclusion and Future Work

In this work, I derived machine learning models to process Darshan logs and predict the throughput of I/O operations of HPC applications. I found that the Deep Neural Network model when combined with Gaussian unit variance data scaling method performs the best among all other options. Yet there were a few limitations that are notable. I am not certain if there was any way to disable the Darshan logging or to observe at what rate that occurred, which could help understand potential bias. There is some noise in the Darshan tool itself, as it does have an invalid data flag and this was present in the dataset. However, these are generally unavoidable sources of error, and the data does provide insight into previously yet unexplored I/O analysis. Second, comparing the performance of different models is challenging due to the lack of consensus of evaluation metrics. Comparing Mean Absolute Error (MAE) as a percentage of the mean ground truth I/O value has become the norm. However, this scalar value cannot encapsulate the nuance of differing I/O patterns between HPC systems. Showing histograms of the error, as well as of the predictions and the true known value, is important to convey a number of factors qualifying the other metrics. For instance, the distribution of the dependent variable is of critical concern in evaluating the merits of any model. Indeed the multi-modality of throughput analyzed in this work makes several metrics that assume Gaussian distribution invalid. In the future, I hope that researchers will consult with HPC systems operators to help define metrics that will better encapsulate their needs, and allow the modeling techniques to maximize benefit delivered to the HPC systems.

Despite these limitations, we believe that this work makes a valuable contribution to 
the field by applying various machine learning models, scaling methods, and using 
multiple evaluation metrics. 
As future work, extending this work with extensive hyperparameter tuning would 
be interesting to improve the performance of XGBoost and DNN models. Another 
area of interest that will hopefully be studied in the future is the effect of the Message 
Passing Interface (MPI) module on I/O. In addition to the POSIX and Lustre file 
system Darshan modules, there is an MPI module that was not analyzed in this work 
at all, however, is contained in the data set. It remains to be seen what effect this 
module may have on the prediction of the I/O or other interesting analyses on the 
MPI data. Another potential research direction is the exploration of transferrable 
machine learning models to mitigate the need for training data collection for each 
cluster separately [30, 24, 1, 3]. 

## References

[1] Md Arifuzzaman and Engin Arslan. Learning transfers via transfer learning. In 
2021 IEEE Workshop on Innovating the Network for Data-Intensive Science 
(INDIS), pages 34–43. IEEE, 2021. 
[2] Md Arifuzzaman and Engin Arslan. Online optimization of file transfers in 
high-speed networks. In Proceedings of the International Conference for High 
Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, pages 1–13, 2021. 
[3] Md Arifuzzaman, Shafkat Islam, and Engin Arslan. Towards generalizable net 
work anomaly detection models. In 2021 IEEE 46th Conference on Local Com 
puter Networks (LCN), pages 375–378. IEEE, 2021. 
[4] Babak Behzad, Surendra Byna, and Marc Snir. Optimizing i/o performance of 
hpc applications with autotuning. ACM Transactions on Parallel Computing 
(TOPC), 5(4):1–27, 2019. 
[5] Babak Behzad, Huong Vu Thanh Luu, Joseph Huchette, Surendra Byna, Ruth 
Aydt, Quincey Koziol, Marc Snir, et al. Taming parallel i/o complexity with 
auto-tuning. In SC’13: Proceedings of the International Conference on High 
Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, pages 1–12. IEEE, 
2013. 
[6] Eugen Betke and Julian Kunkel. Real-time i/o-monitoring of hpc applications 
with siox, elasticsearch, grafana and fuse. In International Conference on High 
Performance Computing, pages 174–186. Springer, 2017. 
[7] Blue Waters. https://bluewaters.ncsa.illinois.edu, 2021. 
[8] Brett Bode, Michelle Butler, Thom Dunning, Torsten Hoeer, William Kramer, 
William Gropp, and Hwu Wen-Mei. The blue waters super-system for super 
science. English (US). In Contemporary High Performance Computing. CRC 
Press, January 2013, pages 339–366. isbn: 9781466568341. 
[9] Philip Carns, Robert Latham, Robert Ross, Kamil Iskra, Samuel Lang, and 
Katherine Riley. 24/7 characterization of petascale i/o workloads. In 2009 IEEE 
International Conference on Cluster Computing and Workshops, pages 1–10. 
IEEE, 2009. 

[10] Tianqi Chen and Carlos Guestrin. XGBoost: a scalable tree boosting system. In 
Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge 
Discovery and Data Mining, KDD ’16, pages 785–794, San Francisco, California, 
USA. ACM, 2016. isbn: 978-1-4503-4232-2. doi: 10.1145/2939672.2939785. 
url: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2939672.2939785. 
[11] Fran¸cois Chollet et al. Keras. https://keras.io, 2015. 
[12] Wu chun Feng and Kirk W. Cameron. The green500 list: encouraging sustain 
able. 
[13] Eliakin Del Rosario, Mikaela Currier, Mihailo Isakov, Sandeep Madireddy, Prasanna 
Balaprakash, Philip Carns, Robert B Ross, Kevin Harms, Shane Snyder, and 
Michel A Kinsy. Gauge: an interactive data-driven visualization tool for hpc 
application i/o performance analysis. In 2020 IEEE/ACM Fifth International 
Parallel Data Systems Workshop (PDSW), pages 15–21. IEEE, 2020. 
[14] Jack J. Dongarra, Piotr Luszczek, and Antoine Petitet. The linpack benchmark: 
past, present, and future, 2002. 
[15] Todd Evans, William L Barth, James C Browne, Robert L DeLeon, Thomas 
R Furlani, Steven M Gallo, Matthew D Jones, and Abani K Patra. Compre 
hensive resource use monitoring for hpc systems with tacc stats. In 2014 First 
International Workshop on HPC User Support Tools, pages 13–21. IEEE, 2014. 
[16] Ian Foster and Carl Kesselman. Globus: a metacomputing infrastructure toolkit. 
The International Journal of Supercomputer Applications and High Perfor 
mance Computing, 11(2):115–128, 1997. 
[17] Ana Gainaru, Guillaume Aupy, Anne Benoit, Franck Cappello, Yves Robert, 
and Marc Snir. Scheduling the i/o of hpc applications under congestion. In 2015 
IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium, pages 1013– 
1022. IEEE, 2015. 
[18] Mihailo Isakov, Eliakin Del Rosario, Sandeep Madireddy, Prasanna Balaprakash, 
Philip Carns, Robert B. Ross, and Michel A. Kinsy. Hpc i/o throughput bot 
tleneck analysis with explainable local models. English (US). In Proceedings of 
SC 2020, International Conference for High Performance Computing, Network 
ing, Storage and Analysis, SC. IEEE Computer Society, November 2020. doi: 
10.1109/SC41405.2020.00037. Publisher Copyright: © 2020 IEEE.; 2020 In 
ternational Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage 
and Analysis, SC 2020 ; Conference date: 09-11-2020 Through 19-11-2020. 
[19] Ryan D Lewis, Zhengchun Liu, Rajkumar Kettimuthu, and Michael E Papka. 
Log-based identification, classification, and behavior prediction of hpc applica 
tions. In In HPCSYSPROS20: HPC System Professionals Workshop, Atlanta, 
GA, 2020. 

[20] Arnab K. Paul, Ahmad Maroof Karimi, and Feiyi Wang. Characterizing ma 
chine learning i/o workloads on leadership scale hpc systems. In 2021 29th 
International Symposium on Modeling, Analysis, and Simulation of Computer 
and Telecommunication Systems (MASCOTS), pages 1–8, 2021. doi: 10.1109/ 
MASCOTS53633.2021.9614303. 
[21] Robert Sisneros, Jonghoon J Kim, Mohammad Raji, and Kalyana Chadalavada. 
How deep is your i/o? toward practical large-scale i/o optimization via machine 
learning methods. 
[22] Shane Snyder, Philip Carns, Kevin Harms, Robert Ross, Glenn K. Lockwood, 
and Nicholas J. Wright. Modular hpc i/o characterization with darshan. In 2016 
5th Workshop on Extreme-Scale Programming Tools (ESPT), pages 9–17, 2016. 
doi: 10.1109/ESPT.2016.006. 
[23] Abdul Jabbar Saeed Tipu, Padraig O Conbhu´ı, and Enda Howley. Applying ´ 
neural networks to predict hpc-i/o bandwidth over seismic data on lustre file 
system for exseisdat. Cluster Computing:1–22, 2021. 
[24] Lisa Torrey and Jude Shavlik. Transfer learning. In Handbook of research on 
machine learning applications and trends: algorithms, methods, and techniques, 
pages 242–264. IGI global, 2010. 
[25] Davut Ucar and Engin Arslan. Streaming file transfer optimization for dis 
tributed science workflows. In 2020 IEEE International Conference on Cluster 
Computing (CLUSTER), pages 187–197. IEEE, 2020. 
[26] Joseph P White, Martins Innus, Matthew D Jones, Robert L DeLeon, Nikolay 
Simakov, Jeffrey T Palmer, Steven M Gallo, Thomas R Furlani, Michael Show 
erman, Robert Brunner, et al. Challenges of workload analysis on large hpc 
systems: a case study on ncsa blue waters. In Proceedings of the Practice and 
Experience in Advanced Research Computing 2017 on Sustainability, Success 
and Impact, pages 1–8. 2017. 
[27] Xindong Wu, Vipin Kumar, J Ross Quinlan, Joydeep Ghosh, Qiang Yang, Hi 
roshi Motoda, Geoffrey J McLachlan, Angus Ng, Bing Liu, S Yu Philip, et al. 
Top 10 algorithms in data mining. Knowledge and information systems, 14(1):1– 
37, 2008. 
[28] Bing Xie, Zilong Tan, Philip Carns, Jeff Chase, Kevin Harms, Jay Lofstead, 
Sarp Oral, Sudharshan S. Vazhkudai, and Feiyi Wang. Interpreting write perfor 
mance of supercomputer i/o systems with regression models. In 2021 IEEE In 
ternational Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS), pages 557– 
566, 2021. doi: 10.1109/IPDPS49936.2021.00064. 
[29] Bin Yang, Xu Ji, Xiaosong Ma, Xiyang Wang, Tianyu Zhang, Xiupeng Zhu, 
Nosayba El-Sayed, Haidong Lan, Yibo Yang, Jidong Zhai, et al. End-to-end 
i/o monitoring on a leading supercomputer. In 16th { USENIX} Symposium on 
Networked Systems Design and Implementation ({ NSDI} 19), pages 379–394, 
2019. 

[30] Qiang Yang, Yu Zhang, Wenyuan Dai, and Sinno Jialin Pan. Transfer learning. Cambridge University Press, 2020.

## Appendix A

## UNR IRB Application

