HAL Id: hal-00719017
https://hal.science/hal-00719017v1
Submitted on 18 Jul 2012
HAL is a multi-disciplinary open access
archive for the deposit and dissemination of scientific research documents, whether they are published or not. The documents may come from
teaching and research institutions in France or
abroad, or from public or private research centers.
L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL, est
destinée au dépôt et à la diffusion de documents
scientifiques de niveau recherche, publiés ou non,
émanant des établissements d’enseignement et de
recherche français ou étrangers, des laboratoires
publics ou privés.
HAL Authorization
One-Sided Communication in RCKMPI for the
Single-Chip Cloud Computer
Steffen Christgau, Bettina Schnor
To cite this version:
Steffen Christgau, Bettina Schnor. One-Sided Communication in RCKMPI for the Single-Chip Cloud
Computer. The 6th Many-core Applications Research Community (MARC) Symposium, Jul 2012,
Toulouse, France. pp.19-23. ffhal-00719017ff
http://sites.onera.fr/scc/marconera2012
Proceedings of the 6th Many-core
Applications Research Community
(MARC) Symposium
July 19
th–20th 2012
ISBN
978-2-7257-0016-8
One-Sided Communication in RCKMPI for the
Single-Chip Cloud Computer
Steffen Christgau and Bettina Schnor
Institute of Computer Science, University of Potsdam
August-Bebel-Strasse 89, 14482 Potsdam, Germany
Email: {christgau, schnor}@cs.uni-potsdam.de
Abstract—One-Sided Communication functions have been defined in the Message Passing Interface standard since version
2. Modern implementations of the interface, such as MPICH2,
support One-Sided Communication. This paper presents insights
to the MPICH2 architecture and the implementation of OneSided Communication in its low-level CH3 communication modules. Further, issues for using MPI’s One-Sided Communication
features on the Single-Chip Cloud Computer are presented and
resolved. The paper also presents a comparative scalability study
of an example application both on the SCC and on an InfiniBand
cluster.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Message Passing Interface (MPI) [1] is a commonly used programming API to implement parallel applications. Version 2 of the MPI Standard [2] specifies synchronous, asynchronous, one-sided, and two-sided communication, where one-sided operations are defined as being
asynchronous by default.
MPI two-sided communication calls are due to the classic
send-recv scheme where each send call must have a matching receive call at the destination. In contrast, One-Sided
Communication (OSC) defines a process interaction mechanism where only one process specifies the communication
parameters. The other process (called target) only has to
provide the memory area (called window) and is not required
to call any communication routine.
MPI-2-OSC separates communication from synchronization
and defines so called synchronization epochs. An arbitrary
number of communication calls can be synchronized within
a single epoch. This bundling reduces the need to make
synchronization calls for each transfer. MPI-2 provides several
API calls to open and close such an epoch. Figure 1 shows
some pseudo code of the typical use of one sided and two
sided communication.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: First,
an overview of the architecture of MPICH2 and the implementation of MPI’s OSC method in the low-level CH3
devices is presented. Based on this discussion, issues in the
MPI implementation for the SCC are revealed and fixed. The
corrected implementation is then used in Section V to compare
the scaling of an example CFD application both on the SCC
using one- and two-sided communication as well as on an
InfiniBand cluster. The conclusion and an overview of related
work constitute the end of the paper.
Node A Node B
One-sided example:
MPI_Win_Create MPI_Win_Create
MPI_Win_Post MPI_Win_Start
 
MPI_Put
 
MPI_Win_Wait MPI_Win_Complete
Two-sided example:
 
MPI_Irecv MPI_Isend
 
MPI_Wait MPI_Wait
Fig. 1. Pseudo code examples of unidirectional asynchronous data exchange
via one-sided and two-sided communication.
II. MPICH2 ARCHITECTURE
MPICH2 is a portable MPI implementation [3]. Its modular
architecture is shown in Figure 2. The methods defined by
the MPI standard are implemented on top of third generation
of the abstract device interface (ADI3) [4]. This layer wraps
around the message transportation device of the target platform
and thereby provides hardware-independence. A downside of
this interface is the huge amount of functions that have to
be implemented for new platforms. To facilitate the adaption
on new hardware platforms the CH3 device was introduced.
This device implements the ADI3 and presents a much simpler interface to so-called channels. The channels implement
the CH3 interface and are responsible to receive and send
messages from resp. to the hardware.
Within an CH3 channel implementation several requirements and conventions from the higher layers have to be
considered. First, all MPI processes are considered to be
connected by virtual connections which do not have to manifest in physical connections. Device specific information for
a connection between two processes, a socket e.g., can be
attached to the according virtual connection. If a message is
going the be sent to a remote process, the upper layers pass
a request to the CH3 channel which activates the according
virtual connection. If it is not possible to satisfy the request
6
Th MARC Symposium, 19–20 July 2012, ONERA ISBN: 978-2-7257-0016-8
One-Sided Communication in RCKMPI for the Single-Chip Cloud Computer 19
Application
MPICH2 ROMIO
(MPI IO Implementation)
Message Passing Interface
Abstract Device Interface (ADI3) ADIO
Channel-3 Device BG Cray
Process Management
SockNemesisSCCMPBSCCSHMSCCMulti
Interface
MPI Implementation MPI
Fig. 2. MPICH2’s layered architecture
immediately, that is the message was not transferred at all or
only a partial transfer was possible, the channel is responsible
to try a retransmission of the unsent part at a later time. This
can be done by adding the request to a queue associated to
the virtual connection.
To send outstanding messages, the CH3 device invokes a
so-called progress engine which must be implemented by the
channel. The implementation checks whether requests have
been enqueued and if so, it tries to send these messages or
even fragments. With the invocation of the progress engine,
the channel must also check for new messages that have been
received by the hardware.
If the channel has detected a new message, it asks upper
MPICH2 layers to create a new receive request based on
the received data. As soon as more data for this request is
received by the channel, it must check whether the request
has been completed by the incoming data. To do so, callback functions are invoked. Besides a default completion callback function, a request may provide its specific routine that
has to be called by the channel. This notification scheme also
applies to the requests created when sending messages. Due
to the callback mechanism, the decision whether the request
has been completed successfully is not up to the channel itself,
but to the higher MPICH2 layers. The channel implementation
must therefore be aware of changes in the send resp. receive
requests.
III. OSC WITH CH3 DEVICES
MPICH2 does not require a CH3 channel to implement
any specific function to support one-sided communication.
Instead, the only requirements for a fully-functional channel
is to implement some book-keeping functions, four methods
to start sending a new message resp. processing a send request
and one function that represents the progress engine. As the
latter one is responsible for receiving new messages, there are
no explicit receive methods.
With these minimal requirements, a CH3 channel is able to
process send and receive requests issued by point-to-point operations like MPI SEND and MPI RECV as well as collective
routines such as MPI BCAST or MPI GATHER. Moreover,
the functions to be implemented by a channel also enable
the usage of one-sided communication. This is made possible
by the CH3 device which provides an implementation for
the OSC-related functions of MPI resp. the ADI3 layer. This
implementation is based on point-to-point operations. Thus, a
channel device is not required to implement OSC-functions,
since the CH3 device breaks the according calls down to an
appropriate call sequence of point-to-point primitives.
The implementation of the OSC functions in the CH3
device basically relies on a queue. The operations issued by communication calls like MPI PUT, MPI GET
and MPI ACCUMULATE and initial locking methods like
MPI WIN LOCK are stored in the queue. By calling a
final synchronization method, like MPI WIN UNLOCK, the
enqueued operations are sent to the target process by the same
mechanism used for point-to-point communication.
The synchronization calls use this mechanism as well. For
locking a window with MPI WIN LOCK, for example, a
request to lock the window is sent to the target process. After
that, the progress engine is invoked until a message is received
which grants access to the lock.
To address hardware that offers support for OSC, e.g. by
remote direct memory access (RDMA), the CH3 device allows
channels to overwrite the default OSC implementation. This
flexibility is achieved through function pointers within the
internal structure that represents a remote memory access
(RMA) window. During the window creation, any of these
pointers can be overwritten by the CH3 channel implementation. Thereby, MPICH2 can be instructed to use the channel’s
implementation of OSC synchronization or communication
calls.
IV. OSC SUPPORT ON THE SCC
MPICH2 had been ported to the Single-Chip Cloud
Computer (SCC) by implementing three different CH3 channels. The port is named RCKMPI and is based on MPICH2
1.2.1p [5]. All of the SCC-specific CH3 channels use shared
memory which is either backed by the message passing buffer
(MPB), the external memory or both. For the latter case,
the memory used for the messages is switched at a constant
threshold. Although the memory used for message transport
differs, the implementation is basically similar: The memory
is partitioned into sections such as each process resp. core
offers dedicated write areas for every other MPI process.
Regarding bandwidth, the channel that uses the MPB delivers
best performance.
As all channels implement the functions required by the
CH3 device, all communication methods are expected to
work. On the one hand, this is actually true for point-to-point
operations. On the other hand, one-sided communication is
not usable with the original RCKMPI implementation. For
instance, the SCC-specific CH3 channels only cover some
basic cases of the MPICH2 test suite. That way, RCKMPI
applications are likely to crash if this communication paradigm
is used.
There are several reasons for this issue. First, the RCKMPI
source code always calls the default message completion
handler defined by MPICH2. Thus, RCKMPI does not account the case where a special completion call-back function
has been associated with the send request. As those callbacks are only defined when OSC-related messages should
6
Th MARC Symposium, 19–20 July 2012, ONERA ISBN: 978-2-7257-0016-8
One-Sided Communication in RCKMPI for the Single-Chip Cloud Computer 20
be transferred, applications based on RCKMPI will show
unpredictable behaviour when using OSC.
Even if the appropriate call-back is invoked on message
completion, the channel implementation is not aware of request modifications caused by upper MPICH2 layers. These
modifications are mainly applied when OSC messages are
transferred. As a consequence, even when invoking the completion method, OSC applications are again likely to crash.
Therefore, the following implementation issues were fixed
for the MPB CH3 channel implementation of RCKMPI: (a)
Invoke the message completion call-back function when send
and receive requests are assumed to be completed. (b) Check
that the call-back handler confirms the completion of the request. (c) If the call-back signals an incomplete request, further
process the unfinished request. (d) On message reception, copy
its payload back to the according user buffers. The fixed source
code is available to the MARC community [6].
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Based on this work, a CFD-like cellular automaton [7] was
used to compare the applications scalability on the SCC with
an InfiniBand cluster. The cellular automaton is a 9-pointstencil computation. We tested two different versions of the
application: one uses OSC and the other two-sided routines
from the MPI standard. The programs use the communication
patterns shown in Figure 1. The communication is performed
after each time step: every MPI process has to exchange
8 KB of data with its two neighbor processes. The according
messages are sent before the process starts to calculate the
inner values of its field fraction to gain optimal computationcommunication-overlap.
In the experiment, the application was executed with an
increasing number of nodes while the size of the computed
two-dimensional field was fixed. Since there are only 28 nodes
in the InfiniBand cluster, the scaling was only analyzed up to
a number of 28 nodes for both systems. Each node of both
the SCC and the InfiniBand cluster executed a single MPI
process. The runtime of the sequential version is divided by
the runtime of parallel program running on n processors to
obtain the speedup.
A. Experimental Environment
The InfiniBand cluster consists of 28 machines equipped
with two Intel Xeon 5520 CPUs each providing four cores
(Hyperthreading disabled). On each node, 48 GB of DDR3
main memory are installed. The InfiniBand connection is based
on 20 Gb/s Mellanox MHGH19-XTC ConnectXZ cards and a
Mellanox MTS3600R-1UNC switch. Further, OpenMPI 1.4.3
was used as an MPI-2 implementation that supports InfiniBand. During the experiments, OpenMPI’s parameters were
choosen such that OSC functions use InfiniBand’s RDMA
features. It is therefore not expected that the OSC application
on the SCC scales better than on the InfiniBand cluster as
there is no RDMA support in RCKMPI.
On the SCC, a modified Linux 2.6.38.3 kernel was used
in conjunction with Busybox. For compiling the application
and RCKMPI, GCC version 4.5.2 has been chosen. On the
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
 0 5 10 15 20 25
speedup
no of procs.
linear
SCC Pt2Pt
InfiniBand Cluster
SCC OSC
Fig. 3. Speedup of the CFD application compared to its sequential version
on the SCC and the InfiniBand Cluster
InfiniBand cluster, Scientific Linux with Kernel 2.6.18 and
GCC 4.3.2 is installed.
B. Results on SCC
The obtained results are presented in Figure 3. The OSC
version on the SCC shows linear scaling, but it is outperformed
by the two-sided communication version on the SCC. The
speedup values are about one third smaller than the two other
versions and only one half of the optimal linear speedup.
The scaling of both the two-sided and the OSC version
of the application can be attributed to the low latency communication network and the RCKMPI CH3 channel implementation. A downside of this implementation is the inherited
handling of OSC by the CH3 device implementation. That is
queueing all communication actions until a final synchronization call is issued (see Section III).
By processing the queue entries messages are sent for
locking the window, transferring the data and finally unlocking
the window. Thus, at least three MPI message are sent to
the target process in a synchronous manner. Compared to the
single non-blocking communication call (MPI Isend) that is
used in the point-to-point version of the application two additional messages are required. On the SCC, the two additional
messages are sent with an handshake protocol between the
communication processes, whereas on the InfiniBand cluster
RDMA does not require any participation of the target process.
C. Comparison with InfiniBand Cluster
The OSC version running on the InfiniBand cluster reached
approximately linear speedup (see Figure 3). This shows
the benefit of an RDMA capable network which allows the
implementation of communication libraries which support
computation-communication-overlap.
VI. RELATED WORK
The authors of [8] report up to 30 % runtime improvement
for an atmospheric simulation, when using MPI-2 one-sided
6
Th MARC Symposium, 19–20 July 2012, ONERA ISBN: 978-2-7257-0016-8
One-Sided Communication in RCKMPI for the Single-Chip Cloud Computer 21
communication in combination with OpenMP instead of pointto-point communication. It is not clear if the improvement is
due to the use of OpenMP or one-sided communication or the
combination.
Different implementation options for MPI2-OSC were analysed in the literature regarding the different capabilities of the
underlying networks [9]–[14]. While one would expect inefficiencies of OSC over transports without support for remote
direct memory access (RDMA), interconnects like InfiniBand
are expected to offer similar or better performance for OSC
than for two-sided communication. However, asynchronous
two-sided communication still offers the best performance if
only a few number of communications are synchronised with
one epoch [9], [10], [15].
In [14] the authors observe that one-sided communication
performs much worse than two-sided communication for short
and medium-sized messages. The reason is spotted in the
overhead of synchronization functions.
The same observation is also made in [15], [16]. A comparison of two- and one-sided MPI2 communication over Gigabit
Ethernet [15] shows that the design of the MPI2-OSC API
is the key performance problem. The design of MPI2-OSC
was compared with another OSC API called NEON in [16]
on top of InfiniBand networks. While InfiniBand is an ideal
network for computation-communication-overlap, the MPI2-
OSC implementation again suffered from the additional overhead and was outperformed by NEON. The authors show that
applications which use MPI-2-OSC suffer from the overhead
of the additional synchronisation message that has to be sent
in order to complete a remote memory access.
Currently, the MPI community discusses the MPI-3 standard [17]. The One-Sided communication interface proposed
by the MPI-3 RMA Working group retains all of the calls from
MPI-2, but adds new additional calls for window creation, synchronisation, and communication. Some of the proposed new
features are implemented and investigated in [18]. Especially,
the new Request-Based operations seem to be promising to
achieve optimal computation-communication-overlap.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we gave insights on the implementation of
One-Sided Communication in MPICH2 which is the base
for the MPI implementation of the SCC – RCKMPI. Based
on this insights, we identified missing functionalities within
that implementation. These issues were fixed and the revised
source code was made available to MARC members.
Further, the scalability of a CFD-like application based
on the OSC implementation of RCKMPI was analyzed and
compared to both a two-sided version on the SCC and a onesided version on an InfiniBand cluster. It was revealed that all
variants scale in a linear fashion, while the two-sided version
on the SCC outperforms the two others. Moreover, the OSC
variant shows poor scaling behavior on the SCC. On the other
hand, the good scaling of the OSC version on the InfiniBand cluster is obviously due to the opportunity to use the
RDMA features. This effect has already been observed when
comparing the MPICH2 implementation with the lightweight
OSC API called NEON both on Gigabit Ethernet [15] and
InfiniBand installations [16].
Future work goes into two directions: First, the scaling of
the OSC features of RCKMPI can be improved. As the SCC
offers hardware support for defining and accessing shared
memory areas, a MPI window for OSC might be defined
with help of the hardware features: A window may reside
in a shared memory which is backed either by the MPB or
the external DDR3 main memory. Further, accesses of a MPI
process resp. core could be supported by dedicated cores. For
example one core per tile could be responsible for performing
RMA operations while the other handles computational tasks
of an application [19]. That way, both RMA and overlap of
communication and computation would be made possible.
Second, it would be interesting to get experiences with
applications using the Global Arrays toolkit on the SCC.
This framework offers a ”virtual shared memory programming
interface.” Moreover, the implementation is based on message
passing libraries, such as MPICH2 and requires OSC features.
Especially, application from the field of quantum chemistry are
heavily using frameworks like Global Arrays [20].
REFERENCES
[1] Message Passing Forum, “MPI: A Message-Passing Interface Standard,”
Tech. Rep., 1994.
[2] ——, “MPI-2: Extensions to the Message Passing Interface,” Tech. Rep.,
Jul. 1997.
[3] W. Gropp, “MPICH2: A new start for MPI implementations,” in Recent
Advances in Parallel Virtual Machine and Message Passing Interface,
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, D. Kranzlmueller, J. Volkert,
P. Kacsuk, and J. Dongarra, Eds. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2002,
vol. 2474, pp. 37–42.
[4] W. Gropp and E. Lusk, “MPICH abstract device interface version
3.3,” Mathematics and Computer Science Division Argonne National
Laboratory, Reference Manual Version 3.3, Dec. 2001, draft.
[5] I. Compres Ure ´ na, M. Riepen, and M. Konow, “RCKMPI – lightweight ˜
MPI implementation for Intel’s Single-chip Cloud Computer (SCC),”
in 18th European MPI Users’ Group Meeting, EuroPVM/MPI 2011,
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Y. Cotronis, A. Danalis,
D. Nikolopoulos, and J. Dongarra, Eds. Springer Berlin / Heidelberg,
2011, vol. 6960, pp. 208–217.
[6] S. Christgau, “MARC Bugzilla Bugreport 386: Missing support for onesided communication,” http://marcbug.scc-dc.com/bugzilla3/show bug.
cgi?id=386, Feb 2012.
[7] “The Cellular Automaton Application,” http://www.cs.uni-potsdam.de/
bs/cellularautomat/, 2006.
[8] A. A. Mirin and W. B. Sawyer, “A scalable implementation of a finitevolume dynamical core in the community atmosphere model,” Int. J.
High Perform. Comput. Appl., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 203–212, 2005.
[9] B. Barrett, G. M. Shipman, and A. Lumsdaine, “Analysis of Implementation Options for MPI-2 One-Sided,” in Proceedings of the 14th European
PVM/MPI Users’ Group Meeting, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 4757. Springer-Verlag, September/October 2007, pp. 242–
250.
[10] W. Gropp and R. Thakur, “An evaluation of implementation options for
mpi one-sided communication,” in Recent Advances in Parallel Virtual
Machine and Message Passing Interface 12th European PVM/MPI
User’s Group Meeting, D. M. et al., Ed. Sorrento, Italy: SpringerVerlag, September 2005, pp. 415–424.
[11] W. Huang, G. Santhanaraman, H.-W. Jin, and D. K. Panda, “Design
alternatives and performance trade-offs for implementing mpi-2 over
infiniband,” in Recent Advances in Parallel Virtual Machine and Message Passing Interface 12th European PVM/MPI User’s Group Meeting,
D. M. et al., Ed. Sorrento, Italy: Springer-Verlag, September 2005, pp.
191–199.
[12] T. S. Woodall, G. M. Shipman, G. Bosilca, R. L. Graham, and A. B.
Maccabe, “High Performance RDMA Protocols in HPC,” in Proceedings
of the 13th European PVM/MPI Users’ Group Meeting, ser. Lecture
6
Th MARC Symposium, 19–20 July 2012, ONERA ISBN: 978-2-7257-0016-8
One-Sided Communication in RCKMPI for the Single-Chip Cloud Computer 22
Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4192. Berlin, Heidelberg: SpringerVerlag, September 2006, pp. 76–85.
[13] J. Liu, W. Jiang, H. Jin, D. Panda, W. Gropp, and R. Thakur, “High
performance mpi-2 one-sided communication over infiniband,” in International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid (CCGrid 04),
April 2004.
[14] Rajeev Thakur and William Gropp and Brian Toonen, “Optimizing the
Synchronization Operations in MPI One-Sided Communication,” High
Performance Computing Applications, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 119–128, 2005.
[15] L. Schneidenbach and B. Schnor, “Design issues in the implementation
of MPI2 one sided communication in Ethernet based networks,” in
PDCN’07: Proceedings of the 25th conference on Parallel and Distributed Computing and Networks (PDCN). ACTA Press, Feb. 2007,
pp. 277–284.
[16] L. Schneidenbach, D. Bohme, and B. Schnor, “Performance Issues of ¨
Synchronisation in the MPI-2 One-Sided Communiction API,” in 15th
European PVM/MPI Users’ Group Meeting. Dublin, Ireland: Spinger,
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 5205, 2008, pp. 177 – 184.
[17] MPI 3.0 Standardization, “MPI: A Message-Passing Interface Standard, Draft,” http://meetings.mpi-forum.org/MPI 3.0 main page.php,
Nov. 2010.
[18] S. Potluri, S. Sur, D. Bureddy, and D. K. Panda, “Design and
implementation of key proposed mpi-3 one-sided communication
semantics on infiniband,” in Proceedings of the 18th European MPI
Users’ Group conference on Recent advances in the message passing
interface, ser. EuroMPI’11. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2011,
pp. 321–324. [Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=
2042476.2042514
[19] M. W. van Tol, R. Bakker, M. Verstraaten, C. Grelck, and C. R. Jesshope,
“Efficient memory copy operations on the 48-core intel scc processor,”
in MARC Symposium, D. Gohringer, M. H ¨ ubner, and J. Becker, Eds. ¨
KIT Scientific Publishing, Karlsruhe, 2011, pp. 13–18.
[20] J. Dinan, P. Balaji, J. R. Hammond, S. Krishnamoorthy, and V. Tipparaju,
“Supporting the Global Arrays PGAS Model Using MPI One-Sided
Communication,” in IPDPS 2012, Shanghai, China, May 2012, in press.
6
Th MARC Symposium, 19–20 July 2012, ONERA ISBN: 978-2-7257-0016-8
One-Sided Communication in RCKMPI for the Single-Chip Cloud Computer 23