Remote Memory Access Programming in MPI-3

TORSTEN HOEFLER, ETH Zurich 
JAMES DINAN, Intel Corporation 
RAJEEV THAKUR, Argonne National Laboratory 
BRIAN BARRETT, Sandia National Laboratories 
PAVAN BALAJI, Argonne National Laboratory 
WILLIAM GROPP, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
KEITH UNDERWOOD, Intel Corporation 
The Message Passing Interface (MPI) 3.0 standard, introduced in September 2012, includes a significant 
update to the one-sided communication interface, also known as remote memory access (RMA). In particu 
lar, the interface has been extended to better support popular one-sided and global-address-space parallel 
programming models to provide better access to hardware performance features and enable new data-access 
modes. We present the new RMA interface and specify formal axiomatic models for data consistency and 
access semantics. Such models can help users reason about details of the semantics that are hard to extract 
from the English prose in the standard. It also fosters the development of tools and compilers, enabling them 
to automatically analyze, optimize, and debug RMA programs. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors: D.1.3 [Programming Techniques]: Concurrent Programming— 
Parallel programming; D.3.3 [Programming Languages]: Language Constructs and Features—Concurrent 
programming structures 
General Terms: Design, Performance 
Additional Key Words and Phrases: MPI, one-sided communication, RMA 
ACM Reference Format: 
Torsten Hoefler, James Dinan, Rajeev Thakur, Brian Barrett, Pavan Balaji, William Gropp, and 
Keith Underwood. 2015. Remote memory access programming in MPI-3. ACM Trans. Parallel Comput. 
2, 2, Article 9 (June 2015), 26 pages. 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2780584 

1. MOTIVATION

Parallel programming models can be split into three categories: (1) shared memory with implicit communication as a side effect of loads and stores to memory and explicit

This work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation under grants CCF-0816909 and CCF 
1144042, and by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Advanced Scientific Computing Research 
under award number DE-FC02-10ER26011 and contract DE-AC02-06CH11357, and award numbers DE 
SC0004131 and DE-FG02-13ER26138. Sandia is a multiprogram laboratory operated by Sandia Corporation, 
a Lockheed Martin Company, for the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration 
under contract DE-AC04-94AL85000. 
Authors’ addresses: T. Hoefler, Universitaetsstrasse 6, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland; email: htor@inf.ethz.ch; J. 
Dinan and K. Underwood, 77 Reed Road, Hudson, MA 01749; emails: {james.dinan, keith.d.underwood}@ 
intel.com; R. Thakur and P. Balaji, 9700 South Cass Avenue, Lemont, IL 60439; emails: {thakur, balaji}@ 
mcs.anl.gov; B. Barrett, Sandia National Laboratories, New Mexico, P.O. Box 5800, Albuquerque, NM 87185- 
1319; email: bwbarre@sandia.gov; W. Gropp, 201 North Goodwin Avenue, Urbana, IL 61801-2302; email: 
wgropp@illinois.edu. 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies show this notice on the first page or initial screen of a display along with the full citation. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. 
To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, to redistribute to lists, or to use any component of this 
work in other works requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Permissions may be requested from 
Publications Dept., ACM, Inc., 2 Penn Plaza, Suite 701, New York, NY 10121-0701 USA, fax + 1 (212) 
869-0481, or permissions@acm.org. 
c 2015 ACM 2329-4949/2015/06-ART9 $15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2780584 

synchronization, (2) message passing (MP) with explicit communication and implicit 
synchronization as a side effect of messages, and (3) remote memory access (RMA) and 
partitioned global address space (PGAS) where communication and synchronization 
are managed explicitly and independently. Some PGAS models offer combined commu 
nication and synchronization functions to achieve higher efficiency. 
High-performance computing (HPC) and datacenter networking architectures have 
undergone a disruptive change in the past decade: they have increasingly converged 
toward remote direct memory access (RDMA), a mechanism that enables a process to 
directly read and write remote memory. RDMA offers higher performance and lower 
CPU load than traditional socket communications due to operating system bypass 
[Shivam et al. 2001]. RDMA is also relatively simple to implement in hardware, and 
its low-level interfaces are well understood [Buonadonna et al. 1998]. Thus, current 
high-performance networks, such as Cray’s Gemini and Aries, IBM’s PERCS and BG/Q 
networks, InfiniBand, and Ethernet (using RoCE), all offer RDMA functionality. 
Programming in shared memory is often a convenient abstraction because remote 
values can just be accessed directly. This spurred a series of research works to em 
ulate shared memory on distributed memory computers. The general conclusion was 
that transparent shared memory cannot be emulated efficiently with the available dis 
tributed memory technologies [Karlsson and Brorsson 1998]. RDMA and the related 
PGAS abstraction provide a viable middle ground where the address space is separated 
into a local load/store accessible part and a remote put/get accessible part. 
The traditional programming model in HPC is the highly successful MP model. In 
this model, processes communicate only through messages. However, the semantic 
mismatch between RDMA and MP can only be bridged with complex and expensive 
protocols [Woodall et al. 2006]. Thus, MP implementations using today’s RDMA net 
works cannot exploit the full potential of the hardware. The Message Passing Interface 
(MPI) 2.0 standard introduced a one-sided communication scheme in 1997 based on 
the technology at that time. The MPI-2 abstract machine model does not reflect today’s 
RDMA networks well and does not support the exploitation of RDMA’s full potential, 
which inhibited its adoption. However, architectural trends, such as RDMA networks 
and the increasing number of (potentially noncoherent) cores on each node, required a 
reconsideration of the programming model. 
The Message Passing Interface Forum, the standardization body of MPI, developed 
new ways for exploiting RDMA networks and multicore CPUs in MPI programs. This 
article, written by key members of the MPI-3 Remote Memory Access Working Group, 
summarizes the new one-sided communication interface of MPI-3 [MPI Forum 2012]. 
The main contributions of this work are (1) a detailed informal specification of MPI’s 
RMA semantics, (2) several application patterns with the RMA synchronization strate 
gies, and (3) a guide toward a formal specification of MPI-3’s RMA semantics. Our work 
is targeted at advanced programmers who want to understand the detailed semantics 
of MPI-3 RMA programming; designers of libraries or domain-specific languages on 
top of MPI-3; researchers thinking about future RMA programming models; and tool, 
library, or compiler developers who aim to support RMA programming. For example, a 
language developer could base semantics of the language on the underlying MPI RMA 
semantics, a tool developer could use the semantics specified in this article to develop 
static-analysis and model-checking tools that reason about the correctness of MPI RMA 
programs, and a compiler developer could design analysis and transformation passes 
to optimize MPI RMA programs transparently to the user. 
We expect that different readers will be interested in different parts of this article 
and hence provide a small overview. Section 2 provides an intuitive description of the 
semantics of RMA. It also explains the relation to RDMA architectures and provides 
some intuition about the performance of these operations. This section is most suited 

for programmers aiming to use RMA. Section 3 specifies axiomatic semantics for MPI-3 
RMA’s memory model and is intended for researchers and advanced developers. It can 
be used to answer rather subtle questions about correct executions and can be encoded 
into correctness checkers such as MemSAT [Torlak et al. 2010]. Section 4 provides 
examples to build intuition about how to use the new semantics and is thus most 
interesting to algorithm designers. 
1.1. Related Work 
Efforts in the area of parallel programming models are manifold. PGAS programming 
models view the union of all local memory as a globally addressable unit. The two most 
prominent languages in the HPC arena are Co-Array Fortran (CAF) [Numrich and 
Reid 1998], now integrated into the Fortran 2008 standard as coarrays, and Unified 
Parallel C (UPC) [UPC Consortium 2005]. CAF and UPC simply offer a two-level view 
of local and remote memory accesses. Indeed, CAF-2 [Mellor-Crummey et al. 2009] 
proposed the notion of teams, a concept similar to MPI communicators, but it has not yet 
been widely adopted. Higher-level PGAS languages, such as X10 [Charles et al. 2005] 
and Chapel [Chamberlain et al. 2007], offer convenient programmer abstractions and 
elegant program design but have yet to deliver the performance necessary in an HPC 
context. Other languages, such as Global Arrays [Nieplocha et al. 1996], offer similar 
semantics restricted to specific structures or domains (in this case, array accesses). 
MPI-2’s RMA model [MPI Forum 2009, §11] is the direct predecessor to MPI-3’s RMA 
model, and MPI-3 is fully backward compatible. However, MPI-3 defines a completely 
new memory model and access mode that can rely on hardware coherence instead of 
MPI-2’s expensive and limited software-coherence mechanisms. 
In general, the MPI-3 approach integrates easily into existing infrastructures, as it is 
a library interface that can work with all compilers [Yang et al. 2014]. A complete speci 
fication of the library semantics enables automated compiler transformations [Danalis 
et al. 2009]. In addition, MPI offers a rich set of semantic concepts such as isolated pro 
cess contexts (communicators), process topologies, and abstract definitions for access 
patterns of communication functions (MPI datatypes). These concepts enable users to 
specify additional properties of their code that allow more complex optimizations at the 
library and compiler level [Schneider et al. 2013]. In addition, communicators and pro 
cess topologies [Traff 2002; Hoefler et al. 2011] can be used to optimize process locality 
during runtime. Another major strength of the MPI concepts is the strong abstraction 
and isolation principles that enable the layered implementation of libraries on top of 
MPI [Hoefler and Snir 2011]. Our expectation is that experts will use MPI RMA as 
an efficient foundation for high-level libraries that provide domain-specific extensions, 
which hide most of the complexity. 
Since MPI RMA offers direct memory access to local and remote memory for multi 
ple threads of execution (MPI processes), questions related to memory consistency and 
memory models arise. Several recent works deal with understanding complex memory 
models of architectures such as x86 [Owens et al. 2009] and specifications for program 
ming languages such as Java [Manson et al. 2005] and C++11 [Boehm and Adve 2008]. 
We will build on the models and notations developed in those papers and define mem 
ory semantics for MPI RMA. The well-known paper demonstrating that threads cannot 
be implemented with a library interface [Boehm 2005] also applies to this discussion. 
Indeed, serial code optimization combined with parallel executing threads may lead to 
erroneous or slow codes. The semantics specified in this work can also be seen as a set 
of restrictions for serial compilers to make them MPI-aware. 
1.2. Overview and Challenges of RMA Programming 
The main complications for RMA programming arise from the separation of communi 
cation (remote accesses) and synchronization. In addition, the RMA interface splits 

synchronization further into memory consistency (i.e., when a remote process ob 
serves a communicated value) and process synchronization (i.e., when a remote process 
“learns” about the state of another process). Furthermore, some RMA synchronizations 
can be nonblocking. 
The main challenges of RMA programming revolve around the semantics of oper 
ation completion and memory consistency. Practical hardware implementations only 
provide weak or relaxed consistency because sequential consistency is too expensive 
to implement. However, most programmers prefer to reason in terms of sequential 
consistency because of its conceptual simplicity. C++11 and Java bridge this gap by 
offering sequential consistency at the language level if the programmer avoids data 
races. Whereas Java defines the behavior of programs containing races, C++11 leaves 
the semantics of programs with races unspecified so that implementations are less 
constrained and able to deliver higher performance. 
MPI models completion, memory consistency, and process synchronization as sep 
arate concepts, which enables the user to reason about them separately. RMA pro 
gramming is thus slightly more complex due to interactions between operations. For 
example, MPI, like most RMA programming models, enables the programmer to start 
operations asynchronously and complete them (locally or remotely) later. This tech 
nique is necessary to hide single-message latency with multiple pipelined messages; 
however, it makes reasoning about program semantics more complex. In fact, in the 
MPI RMA model, all communication operations are nonblocking; in other words, the 
communication functions may return before the operation completes. Bulk synchro 
nization functions can be used to complete previously issued operations. In the ideal 
case, this feature enables a programming model in which high latencies can be ignored 
and processes never “wait” for remote completion. 
The resulting complex programming environment is often not suitable for average 
programmers (e.g., domain scientists); rather, writers of high-level libraries can provide 
domain-specific extensions that hide most of the complexity. The MPI RMA interface 
aims to enable expert programmers and implementers of domain-specific libraries 
and languages to extract the highest performance from a large number of computer 
architectures in a performance-portable way. However, as was the case for the MPI-2 
RMA interface, there are rules that can be followed by programmers that will ensure 
correct behavior. These are sufficient but not necessary rules that may sacrifice some 
performance or expressivity for simplicity. This article focuses on the full potential and 
power of the MPI RMA interface; the discussion here can be used to describe subsets 
of the MPI RMA interface that may be easier for average programmers to use and 
understand. 

2. SEMANTICS AND ARCHITECTURAL CONSIDERATIONS We now proceed to discuss the conceptual underpinnings of MPI RMA programming. Two central concepts of MPI RMA are memory regions and process groups. An MPI window binds a memory region at a process to a group of processes. The window’s process group is identical to the process group of communicator that was used to create the window. This mechanism enables two types of spatial isolation: (1) processes outside the group cannot access memory that is exposed within the group, and (2) memory that is not attached to an MPI window cannot be accessed by remote processes, even in the same group. Both principles are important for parallel software engineering. They simplify the development and maintenance of parallel programs by offering an additional separation of concerns; that is, nonexposed memory cannot be corrupted by remote processes. They also enable the development of spatially separated libraries in that a library can use either a dedicated set of processes or a separate memory region and thus not interfere with other libraries or user code [Hoefler and Snir 2011].

Fig. 1. Overview of communication options in the MPI-3 specification.

Fig. 2. MPI-3 memory window creation variants.

MPI RMA offers the basic data-movement operations put and get and additional 
predefined atomic operations called accumulate. Put and get are designed to enable 
direct usage of the shared memory subsystem or hardware-enabled RDMA. Accumu 
lates require computation, but they can, in some cases, also use hardware acceleration 
directly. All communication functions are nonblocking and are completed by using 
either bulk completion functions or request-based completion. Bulk completions are 
generally faster than separate request-based completions. Figure 1 shows an overview 
of communication and synchronization functions in the MPI specification. We explain 
each function in the following sections. 
2.1. Memory Exposure 
MPI RMA offers four calls to expose local memory to remote processes. The first three 
variants create windows that can be remotely accessed only by MPI communication 
operations. Figure 2 shows an overview of the different versions. The fourth variant en 
ables users to exploit shared memory semantics directly and provides direct load/store 
access to remote window memory if supported by the underlying architecture. 
The first (legacy) variant is the normal win create function: each process specifies an 
arbitrary consecutive memory region (≥ 0 bytes) to be exposed and a communicator 
from which the process group is derived. The function returns an opaque window object 
that can be used for remote accesses. Remote accesses are addressed relative to the start 
of the window at the target process, so a put to offset zero at process k updates the first 
memory block in the window that process k exposed. MPI supports the specification of 
the least addressable unit in each window (called the displacement unit). The fact that 
processes can attach the window to consecutive memory regions at arbitrary addresses 
may lead to large translation tables on systems that offer RDMA functions. These 
tables may be distributed [Mellor-Crummey et al. 2009], but the necessary remote 
lookups may reduce performance. 
The second creation function, win allocate, transfers the responsibility for memory 
allocation to MPI. RDMA networks that require large translation tables for win create 

Fig. 3. Example MPI-3 shared memory window layout for a job running on four dual-core nodes. Each node has its own window that supports load/store and RMA accesses. The different shapes indicate that each process can pick its local window address and size independently of other processes.

may be able to avoid such tables by allocating memory at identical addresses on all 
processes (sometimes called symmetric allocation [Gerstenberger et al. 2013]). Other 
wise, the semantics are identical to the win create function. 
The third creation function, create dynamic, does not expose memory in the created 
window. Instead, it binds only a process group where each process can use subsequent 
local function calls for exposing memory in the window. This mode naturally maps to 
many RDMA network architectures; however, it may be more expensive than allocated 
windows because the MPI library may need to maintain additional structures for each 
exposed memory region. This mode can, however, be used for more dynamic programs 
that require process-local memory management, such as dynamically sized hash tables 
or object-oriented languages. 
The fourth and last creation function, shared memory window allocation, enables 
processes to directly map memory regions into the address space of other processes. 
For example, if an MPI job is running on multicore nodes, then each process could share 
its memory directly with all other processes on the same node. This feature may lead 
to much lower overhead for communications and memory accesses than going through 
the MPI layer. The win allocate shared function will create such a directly mapped 
window for process groups where all processes can share memory. 
The helper function comm split type enables programmers to determine groups of 
processes that enable such memory sharing. More details on shared memory windows 
and detailed semantics and examples can be found in Hoefler et al. [2012]. Figure 3 
shows an example of shared memory windows for a job running on four dual-core nodes. 
Just like a process can be in multiple communicators, it can also expose multiple 
windows with different exposure calls. The MPI standard also allows a process to 
expose overlapping memory in different windows. 
2.2. Memory Access 
One strength of the MPI RMA semantics is that they pose only minimal requirements 
on the underlying hardware to support an efficient implementation. For example, the 
put and get calls require only that the data be committed to the target memory and 
provide initiator-side completion semantics. Both calls make no assumption about the 
order of the commits. Thus, races such as overlapping updates or reads conflicting with 
updates have no guaranteed result without additional synchronization. This model 
supports networks with nondeterministic routing as well as weakly consistent or non 
coherent memory systems. 
2.3. Accumulates 
Similar to put and get, accumulates strive to place the least possible restrictions on 
the underlying hardware. They are also designed to take direct advantage of hardware 
support if it is available. The minimal guarantee for accumulates are atomic updates 
(something much harder to achieve than simple data transport). The update is atomic 

only on the unit of the smallest datatype in the MPI call (usually 4 or 8 bytes), which 
is often supported in hardware. Larger types, such as double complex numbers, may 
not be supported in hardware. In this case, the MPI library can use software locking of 
the remote window to guarantee atomicity. 
Accumulates, however, allow overlapping conflicting accesses only if the basic types 
are identical and well aligned. Thus, a specification of ordering is required. Here, MPI 
offers strong consistency at the granularity of primitive datatypes by default, which 
is most convenient for programmers but may come at a cost to performance. However, 
the strong consistency can be relaxed by expert programmers to any combination 
of read/write ordering that is minimally required for the successful execution of the 
program. The fastest mode is to require no ordering. 
Accumulates can also be used to emulate atomic put or get if overlapping accesses 
are necessary. In this sense, get accumulate with the operation no op will behave like 
an atomic read, and accumulate with the operation replace will behave like an atomic 
write. However, one must be aware that atomicity is guaranteed only at the level of 
each basic datatype. Thus, if two processes use replace to perform two simultaneous 
accumulates of the same set of two integers (either specified as a count or as a datatype), 
the result may be that one integer has the value from the first process and the second 
integer has the value from the second process. 
2.4. Request-Based Operations 
Bulk local completion of communications has the advantage that no handles need to 
be maintained to identify specific operations. These operations can run with little over 
head on systems where this kind of completion is directly available in hardware, such 
as Cray’s Gemini or Aries interconnects [Alverson et al. 2010; Faanes et al. 2012]. 
However, some programs require a more fine-grained control of local buffer resources 
and thus need to be able to complete specific messages. For such cases, request-based 
operations, prefixed with R (e.g., MPI_Rput), can be used in passive mode. These opera 
tions return a request object similar to nonblocking point-to-point communication that 
can be tested or awaited for completion using test or wait functions. Completion refers 
only to local completion in this context: for request-based put and accumulate opera 
tions, local completion means that the local buffer may be reused. For request-based 
get and get accumulate operations, local completion means that the remote data has 
been delivered to the local buffer. 
Request-based operations are useful when the application issues a number of non 
blocking RMA operations and waits for the completion of a subset of them before it can 
continue computation. An application may start several get operations and compute 
the data in the order of their completion (see Listing 1). Note that the completion order 
may be different from the order in which the operations were started. 
Request-based operations enable finer-grained management of individual RMA op 
erations, but users should be aware that the associated request management can also 
cause additional runtime overhead in the MPI implementation. 
2.5. Memory Models 
To support different applications and systems efficiently, MPI defines two memory mod 
els: separate and unified. These memory models define the conceptual interaction with 
remote memory regions. MPI conceptually separates each window into a private and a 
public copy. Local CPU operations (also called load and store operations) always access 
the local copy of the window, whereas remote operations (get, put, and accumulates) 
target the public copy of the window. 
The separate memory model assumes systems where coherency is managed by soft 
ware. In this model, remote updates target the public copy and loads/stores target the 

Fig. 4. Unified and separate memory models.

Listing 1. Example (pseudo) code for using request-based operations.

private copy. Synchronization operations, such as lock/unlock and sync, synchronize 
the contents of the two copies for a local window. The semantics do not prescribe that 
the windows must be separate, just that they may be separate. In other words, remote 
updates may also update the private copy. However, the rules in the separate memory 
model ensure that a correct program will always observe memory consistently. These 
rules force the programmer to perform separate synchronization. 
The unified memory model relies on hardware-managed coherence. It assumes that 
the private and public copies are identical; that is, the hardware automatically prop 
agates updates from one to the other (without MPI calls). This model is similar to 
cache-coherence protocols on multicore CPUs and memory semantics of RDMA net 
works that propagate writes to their destination eventually. It enables programmers 
to exploit the whole performance potential of architectures in which both the processor 
and network provide such progress guarantees. Moreover, it places a lower burden on 
the programmer, as it requires less explicit synchronization. Figure 4 shows a compar 
ison between the two memory models. 
A portable program would query the memory model for each window and behave 
accordingly. Programs that are correct in the separate model are always also correct in 
the unified model. Thus, programming for the separate memory model is more portable 
but may require additional synchronization calls. 

Fig. 5. Active target synchronization: fence mode for bulk-synchronous applications (left) and scalable active 
target mode for sparse applications (right). 
2.6. Synchronization 
All communication operations are nonblocking and arranged in epochs. An epoch 
is delineated by synchronization operations and forms a unit of communication. All 
communication operations are completed locally and remotely by the call that closes 
an epoch (the various completion calls are discussed later). Epochs can conceptually be 
divided into access and exposure epochs: the process-local window memory can only be 
accessed remotely if the process is in an exposure epoch, and a process can only access 
remote memory when it is in an access epoch. Naturally, a process can be simultane 
ously in access and exposure epochs. 
MPI offers two main synchronization modes based on the involvement of the target 
process: active target synchronization and passive target synchronization. In active 
target synchronization, the target processes expose their memory in exposure epochs 
and thus participate in process synchronization. In passive target synchronization, 
the target processes are always in an exposure epoch and do not participate in syn 
chronization with the accessing processes. Each mode is tailored to different use cases. 
Active target synchronization supports bulk-synchronous applications with a relatively 
static communication pattern, whereas passive target synchronization is best suited 
for random accesses with quickly changing target processes. 
2.6.1. Active Target Synchronization. MPI offers two modes of active target synchroniza 
tion: fence and general. In the fence synchronization mode, all processes associated 
with the window call fence and advance from one epoch to the next. Fence epochs are 
always both exposure and access epochs. This type of epoch is best suited for bulk 
synchronous parallel applications that have quickly changing access patterns, such as 
many graph-search problems [Willcock et al. 2011]. 
In general active target synchronization, processes can choose to which other pro 
cesses they open an access epoch and for which other processes they open an exposure 
epoch. Access and exposure epochs may overlap. This method is more scalable than 
fence synchronization when communication is with a subset of the processes in the 
window, as it does not involve synchronization among all processes. Exposure epochs 
begin with a call to post (which exposes the window memory to a selected group) and 
complete with a call to test or wait (which tests or waits for the access group to fin 
ish their accesses). Access epochs begin with a call to start (which may wait until all 
target processes in the exposure group exposed their memory) and finish with a call 
to complete. The groups of start and post and complete and wait must match; that is, 
each group has to specify the complete set of access or target processes. This type of 
access is best for computations that have relatively static communication patterns and 
few communication partners, such as many stencil access applications [Datta et al. 
2008]. Figure 5 shows example executions for both active target modes. The dashed 

Fig. 6. Passive target mode examples.

lines between processes represent get request commands, and the solid lines between 
processes represent data transfers. 
2.6.2. Passive Target Synchronization. The concept of exposure epoch is not relevant in 
passive mode, as all processes always expose their memory. This feature leads to re 
duced safety (i.e., arbitrary accesses are possible) but also potentially to improved 
performance. Passive mode can be used in two ways: single-process lock/unlock as in 
MPI-2 and global shared lock accesses. 
In the single-process lock/unlock model, a process locks the target process before 
accessing it remotely. To avoid conflicts between local load/store and remote RMA ac 
cesses (see Section 3), a process may lock its local window exclusively. Exclusive remote 
window locks may be used to protect conflicting accesses, similar to reader-writer locks 
(shared and exclusive in MPI terminology). Acquiring a lock guarantees local memory 
consistency, and releasing a lock guarantees remote consistency as well. More seman 
tic details are explained in Section 3. Figure 6(a) shows an example with multiple 
lock/unlock epochs and remote accesses. The gray dashed-dotted lines represent the 
actual locked region (in time) when the operations are performed at the target process. 
Note that the lock function itself is a nonblocking function—it does not have to wait 
for the lock to be acquired (in this case, accesses have to be buffered). Lock is also 
one sided; thus, it does not enforce an ordering of epochs across processes, and access 
epochs to process 2 in Figure 6(a) can occur in the order shown or in the reverse order. 
In the global lock model, each process starts a lock all epoch to all other processes. As 
opposed to fence, lock all is not collective. Lock all epochs are shared locks by definition. 
Processes then communicate via RMA operations to update data and use point-to 
point communication or synchronization operations for notification. Fine-grained data 
structure locks, such as MCS (see Section 4.3), can be implemented in this mode. 
Figure 6(b) shows an example of a lock all epoch with several communications and 
flushes. A flush ends the current epoch and ensures memory consistency. MPI also 
allows mixing both lock modes and point-to-point communication freely. 
3. SEMIFORMAL DEFINITION OF SEMANTICS 
Our specification of the memory model tries to be as precise as possible while still 
being readable by professional programmers. We aim to specify the semantics with 
sufficient precision to enable other researchers to derive a formal specification of the 
MPI-3 RMA memory models and develop valid transformations for such programs. 1 
For this purpose, we follow the conventions from Manson et al. [2005] and Boehm and 
Adve [2008]. Yet, the level of detail creates complex interactions and readers who are 

1Small additions and the removal of simplifications are necessary for defining a full formal model. The model presented in this work is kept simple and readable to foster human reasoning.

primarily interested in gaining an intuitive understanding about the semantics for 
practical use may skip to Section 4, where we present use cases and examples. 
Formal semantics can be used for proving consistency of the standard; indeed, we 
found two issues in MPI-3 while establishing the models: (1) a loose definition that 
allows interpretation of memory consistency rules in different, conflicting ways and 
(2) a missing definition for the interaction between active and passive target mode. 
We also found that the formal notation can be used to concisely describe corner cases 
as litmus tests [Mador-Haim et al. 2011], many of which resolve themselves after 
formalization. In addition, applications written in MPI-3 RMA could be verified for 
correctness and determinism similar to programs on multicore CPUs [Torlak et al. 
2010]. Formal semantics could also be used to design and verify semantics-preserving 
compiler transformations [Boehm 2005]. 
MPI’s memory semantics are specified in terms of regions of exposed memory called 
MPI windows. Each MPI RMA call is constrained to target a single window. Each 
such memory window has an associated set of MPI processes that may perform MPI 
RMA operations on the window memory of any process in the set. Our model considers 
only operations on memory associated with a window. MPI RMA comprises memory 
operations and synchronization operations. Window memory can also be accessed by 
the program using local load and store operations (induced by statements in the source 
code or MPI operations). To simplify our notation, we assume that each primitive 
datatype occupies distinct memory locations in a window (with a per-byte granularity). 
We also assume that all operations are aligned at multiples of the size of the accessed 
primitive datatype. 
A correct MPI RMA program is a program where each conflicting access is synchro 
nized with process synchronization (we call this happens before) as well as memory 
synchronization (we call this consistency). In addition, correct MPI programs do not 
deadlock or livelock. MPI offers different synchronization calls to achieve both orders. 
Our semantics consider executions of programs. First, we introduce two initial types of 
actions: memory and synchronization. Following Manson et al. [2005] and Boehm and 
Adve [2008], we define a memory action as the tuple 

a, o,t, rl, wl, u, p

with the following elements: 
a: [action type] can be one of the following: local store (ls), local load (ll), remote com 
munication put (rcp), remote communication get (rcg), remote accumulate get (rag, 
with the special case fetch and op), remote accumulate (rac), or remote accumulate 
compare and swap (ras). 
o: [origin] contains the MPI process rank for the origin of the action. 
t: [target] contains the MPI process rank for the destination of the action. Actions of 
type ll and ls can have only the local process as destination. 
rl: [read location] contains the location read by the action. This is not specified for ls 
and is a tuple of the form compare location, swap location for ras. 
wl: [write location] contains the location written by the action (not specified for ll). 
u: an arbitrary [unique] identifier for the action. 
p: [source point] is a label identifying the source program point. 
Similarly, a synchronization action is defined as the tuple 

a, o,t, u, p

with the following elements:

a: [action type] can be one of the following: fence (sfe), lock shared (sls), lock exclusive 
(sle), unlock (sul), lock all (sla), unlock all (sula), flush (sfl), flush local (sfll), flush all 
(sfla), flush local all (sflla), win-sync (sws), and external synchronization (ses, e.g., 
matching send/recv pairs or collective operations). 
o: [origin] contains the process rank for the origin of the action. 
t: [target] contains the process rank for the destination of the action. The actions sla, 
sula, sfla, sflla have a special identifier as destination, which stands for the entire 
set of processes associated with the window. 
u: an arbitrary [unique] identifier for the action. 
p: [source point] is a label identifying the source program point. 
We omit the generalized active target synchronization and request-based RMA op 
erations to keep the notation simple. They are conceptually similar to the modeled 
operations, and their omission does not affect the conclusions drawn. However, mod 
eling these would require several new symbols and interactions, adding significant 
complexity and jeopardizing our goal of readability. 
For brevity, we name actions of type z just as z instead of “x where x.a = z”. For 
example, sle reads “the action sle of type lock exclusive.” We use the notation v = (x| y) 
to indicate that v is either of type x or y. For example, we write (sls| sle) to denote a 
single action of type lock shared or lock exclusive. Ordering relations such as (sls| sle) 
→(sls| sle) can be read like “an action of type lock shared or lock exclusive is ordered with 
another action of type lock shared or lock exclusive.” That means that the expression 
orders two actions of all possible type combinations, such as sls → sls, sle → sle, sle 
→sls, sls → sle. 
We define the following abbreviations for common action types: a put/get action 
rc∗ := (rcp| rcg), a remote accumulate action ra∗ := (rac| rag| ras), a remote memory 
action r∗ := (rc∗| ra∗ ), a local memory action l∗ := (ll| ls), and a synchronization action 
s∗ := (sfe| sls| sle| sul| sla| sula| sfl| sfll| sfla| sflla| sws| ses). 
In addition, remote memory actions r∗ as well as unlock actions (sul| sula) and remote 
flush actions (sfl| sfla) create virtual actions (vac| vas) at the target process. A virtual 
communication action vac represents the event when the effect of the communication 
action takes place at the target, and a virtual synchronization action vas represents 
the event when a synchronization action takes place at the target. For example, for 
an rcp, the corresponding vac is the action that commits the data to the destination 
memory, and for an rcg, it is the action that reads the data from destination memory. 
Virtual actions are necessary to define consistency and process order for purely one 
sided remote events. We arbitrary abbreviate virtual actions as va∗ = (vac| vas). 
We can now define the execution of a program as a set of actions, orders, and functions 
X = P, A, po 
−→ , W, V, so 
−→ , hb 
−→ , co 
−→ , 
where 
P: is the program to be executed; 
A: is the set of all actions (types s∗| r∗| l∗| va∗ ); po 
→ specifies a total order (program order) of actions (s∗| r∗| l∗ ) at the same process 
much like the “sequenced-before” order in C++ or the “program order” in Java, 
which specifies the order of executions in a single-threaded execution; 
W: is a function that returns the store (ls), remote put (rcp), or remote accumulate 
(ra∗ ) that wrote the value into the location read by the specified action; 
V : is a function that returns the value written by the specified action; 

so 
→ is a partial order of the synchronization relations of process synchronization and 
virtual actions (s∗| va∗ ) including external waiting-for relationships (e.g., arise from 
ses actions like collective operations and matched send/recv pairs); 

hb → is a transitive relation between pairs of actions, in which the relation hb −→ is the

transitive closure of the union of

po 
−→ and so 
−→ ; and co 
→ is a partial order of memory actions and virtual actions (r∗| l∗| va∗ ), in which a 
consistency edge x 

co −→ y guarantees that the memory effects of action x are visible

to y. Consistency order

co −→ and happens-before order hb −→ are representing the memory con sistency and process synchronization concepts, respectively. If x

co −→ y in an execution, then y observes the effect of x. If y originates at a different process than x, then unbounded network latencies may delay the commit and it is generally not specified when y commits. Thus,

co −→ alone cannot guarantee consistent semantics. However, MPI

specifies that x

co −→ y implies that if y happens arbitrary late (or is repeated), then y observes the effect of x eventually in unified memory windows; this guarantee is needed for polling and does not require an

hb −→ ordering (see Section 3.5 for an example). To establish a guaranteed order between actions on different processes, MPI specifies process synchronization operations that imply

so −→ by delaying a process’s execution until a matching synchronization is issued and has arrived. Both

co −→ , which only en sures synchronized memory, and

hb 
−→ which only ensures synchronized process actions, 
have to be combined to enforce correct executions. Indeed, the active mode synchro 
nization primitives guarantee both orders. However, some complex synchronization 
mechanisms allow the user to separate the two orders. We thus abbreviate a consistent 
happens-before order between two actions x and y as 
x 
cohb 
−−→ y := x hb 
−→ y ∧ x co 
−→ y. (1) 

For two actions x and y and an order of type O ∈ {

po 
−→ , so 
−→ , hb 
−→ , co 
−→} , we denote that x 
and y are not ordered by O as 
x O y := ¬ (x O 
−→ y ∨ y O 
−→ x). (2) 
For example, x hb y means that x and y happen concurrently in happens-before order, 
and x ∦hb y means that x and y are ordered in happens-before order. Unless otherwise 
stated, all relations and orders assume actions at the same process. 
3.1. Valid Executions and Process Synchronization 
We now specify valid programs in terms of their executions. In a correct and deadlock 
free MPI program, all possible executions must be valid. An execution is valid under 
the following conditions: 
(1) Each action is generated by executing a program statement, and all actions occur 
in an order ( 

po −→ ) consistent with the control flow of each process in the program. (2) Passive target (lock/unlock) must be called in the correct order at each process (e.g., each unlock is preceded by a matching lock in program order, and each lock is followed by an unlock). Let

[x..y] := { z : x po −→ z po −→ y} . (3)

Formally, for an action x = (sls| sle), 
∃ y : x po 
−→ y ∧ y.a = sul ∧ x.t = y.t ∧ ∀ z ∈ [x..y], z.a = sfe ∧ z.a ∈ { sls, sle} ⇒ z.t = x.t 
(4) 
and similarly, when x = sla, 
∃ y : x po 
−→ y ∧ y.a = sula ∧ ∀ z ∈ [x..y], z.a ∈ { / sfe, sls, sle, sul} . (5) 
(3) Fence actions are matched correctly; that is, for each fence sfei on process i, there must be a corresponding fence sfek on each other process k (for all processes in the group associated with the window) such that sfei hb sfek. 
(4) Windows may not be locked and exposed concurrently such that for an action x = (sls| sle| sla): x ∦hb sfe and for all x hb −→ sfe there exists an unlock y where y.a ∈ { sul, sula} that matches x and y hb −→ sfe. 
(5) For actions sfe 0 po −→ r∗ 

po −→ sfe 1, sfe 0 may only open a fence epoch when the MPI_MODE_NOSUCCEED assertion is not given and s∗ ∈ / [sfe 0 ..r∗ ]. (6) The sfe 1 action may only close a fence epoch when the MPI_MODE_NOPRECEDE assertion is not given and

s∗ ∈ / [r∗ ..sfe 1]. (7) 
(6) The synchronization actions (sfl| sfla| sfll| sflla) can only be called in passive target mode; that is, ∃ y = (sls| sle| sla) : y po −→ x po −→ (sfl| sfla| sfll| sflla) ∧ x.a = sfe. (8) 
(7) The program is deadlock free; that is, the directed graph G = (A, hb −→ ) contains no cycles (this excludes the synchronization orders introduced by matching fences, single unlocks, and single flushes). 
(8) For each remote memory action r∗ , the origin process r∗ .o is in an epoch of type access (see Section 3.2). The target process r∗ .t is in an epoch of type exposure if the accessing origin process’s last synchronization operation (in po −→ ) was of type sfe. 
The orders 
po 
−→ and so 
−→ , and thus hb 
−→ , are uniquely defined by the execution schedule 
and the rules for a well-formed execution. The consistency order is defined by the 
semantics of epochs and synchronization operations. We define these in the following 
sections. 
3.2. Epochs, Synchronization, and Consistency 
Synchronization operations logically split the execution at each process into epochs. 
Epochs are a concept to enforce consistency for local and remote operations. We now 
define all significant interactions between all (r∗| l∗| s∗ ) actions of valid executions with 
regard to process synchronization 
so 
−→ , program order po 
−→ , and consistency order co 
−→ . 
3.2.1. Epochs. Epochs have a total order per process for a given pair of window and 
target arguments and can be of type access (the process acts as source of RMA op 
erations), type exposure (the process acts as destination of RMA operation), or both 
simultaneously. Each epoch starts with a synchronization action (sfe| sle| sls| sla) and 
ends with a locally matching synchronization action (sfe| sul| sula). Two synchroniza 
tion operations sfe match locally if no other sfe occurs between them, sla matches the 
next sula in 
po 
−→ and vice versa, and sle or sls match the next sul (with the same target 
ACM Transactions on Parallel Computing, Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 9, Publication date: June 2015. 

process) in 
po 
−→ and vice versa. A synchronization action (sfl| sfla) has the effect of closing 
and opening an epoch. 
Each memory action x = (r∗| l∗ ) happens in exactly one epoch that is bounded by 
matching synchronization actions (in 
po 
−→ ). Two epochs u and v are ordered by hb 
−→ if 
the ending synchronization action s∗ u of u is ordered with the starting synchronization 
action s∗ v of v as s∗ u hb 
−→ s∗ v. 
3.2.2. Virtual Actions. Virtual actions belong to a real action in the trace. However, 
virtual actions happen at a different process than the originating action. They indicate 
when the effect of a real action commits at the target process. 
Each virtual synchronization action vas is part of a real synchronization action s∗ , 
and it is coherent as well as synchronized with its originating action. We abbreviate 
coherency as well as synchronization order between two actions x and y as x 
coso 
−−→ y = x co 
−→ y∧ x so 
−→ y. Since it blocks until all messages commit remotely, it introduces orders 
in both directions. To model this, we split the s∗ action into start s∗ s and end action s∗ e 
and define s∗ s coso 
−−→ vas and vas coso 
−−→ s∗ e. We abbreviate this split action for brevity with 

s∗

coso 
−−→ vas. Each virtual communication action vac is part of a real communication 
action r∗ , and it is coherent as well as synchronized with its originating action. We also 
split communication actions into start and end parts r∗ s and r∗ e and define r∗ s coso 
−−→ vac 

and vac coso −−→ r∗ e abbreviated as r∗

coso 
←→ vac. A virtual action va∗ happens at the target 
(s∗| r∗ ).t of its originating action (s∗| r∗ ). The location where a virtual action happens is 
its origin va∗ .o. 
3.2.3. Remote Memory Actions and Local Effects. Remote memory actions r∗ cause local 
load/store operations to read or write the data at the origin r∗ .o and a virtual remote 
communication action at r∗ .t when the action takes place at the target. Thus, each 
r∗can be modeled by a set of l∗ and the virtual communication action vac. The action vac 
acts on the public window copy at the target, whereas l∗ act on the private window copy. 
Again, we assume that r∗ is split into start and end actions. We define the following 
optional replacement rules to model local and remote effects of communication actions: 
rcge = ls, rcps = ll, racs = ll, rass = ll, rase = ls, rags = ll, and rage = ls. However, we 
keep the remote actions r∗ in the following to define their interaction with locks and 
flushes precisely. 
Some synchronization operations complete remote actions r∗ , whereas others only 
enforce consistency of local actions l∗ . Thus, we will consider interactions between local 
memory actions l∗ , remote memory actions r∗ , and virtual actions (vas| vac) with the 
synchronization actions s∗ in the following. 
3.2.4. Active Target Synchronization. The active target synchronization mode uses sfe 
actions to collectively transition all processes from epoch i to epoch i + 1. A fence can 
essentially be seen as a single action invoked by all processes in the group associated 
with the window. It introduces 
co 
−→ and so 
−→ between remote matching fences at all pairs 
of processes i and j. As for the virtual action, we split sfe into start and end actions and 
the orders of actions between arbitrary processes i and j sfe i 
s 

co −→ sfe j e and sfe i s

so 
−→ sfe j e . 
As for virtual actions, we abbreviate the orders and split using sfe i coso 
←→ sfe j in the 
following. Fences match remotely in the order of issuing in the window; that is, the k th 
fence on process j matches the k th fence on process i. In addition, a fence guarantees 
local consistency for all 
hb 
−→ -ordered load/store and virtual communication actions 

(r∗| l∗| vac) hb −→ sfe ⇒ (r∗| l∗| vac) co −→ sfe and sfe hb −→ (r∗| l∗| vac) ⇒ sfe co −→ (r∗| l∗| vac). (9)

3.2.5. Passive Target Synchronization. In the passive target synchronization mode, the 
concept of an exposure epoch does not exist, and all processes can be accessed at any 
time without any MPI call at the “passive” target. A process-local access epoch to a 
single process j is opened at process i after an action (sls| sle).t = j ∧ (sls| sle).o = i and 
ends with a sul.t = j ∧ sul.o = i action. A process-local access epoch to all processes is 
opened at process i by an action sla.o = i and ends with action sula.o = i. 
Lock/Unlock. Lock operations can be either shared or exclusive. In a valid execution, 
a shared lock (sls| sla) is ordered by a synchronization order sul so 
−→ sls with all previous 
unlocks sul for which sls.t = sul.t and sul is matching an exclusive lock sle. An exclusive 
lock sle is ordered by a synchronization order (sul| sula) so 
−→ sle with all previous unlocks 
sul for which sle.t = sul.t and all previous sula. Lock actions guarantee local consistency 

(sls| sle| sla) hb −→ l∗ ⇒ (sls| sle| sla) co −→ l∗ if (sls| sle| sla).o = l∗ .o (10)

and

vas hb −→ (sls| sle| sla) ⇒ vas co −→ (sls| sle| sla) if (sls| sle| sla).o = vas.o. (11) Unlock completes remote actions locally

r∗

## po −→ (sul| sula) ⇒ r∗

co 
−→ (sul| sula) (12) 
and also guarantees that local memory is consistent, such that 
(sul| sula) po 
−→ l∗ ⇒ (sul| sula) co 
−→ l∗ (13) 
if and only if the value accessed by l∗ was accessed by an r∗ action (its related ls) after 
the matching (sle| sls) and sul.t = r∗ .t. Unlock also propagates updates to the public 
window 
ls 
po 
−→ (sul| sula) ⇒ ls co 
−→ (sul| sula) and (sul| sula) po 
−→ vas ⇒ (sul| sula) co 
−→ vas. (14) 
In addition, an unlock completes actions remotely and generates a virtual action vas 
at sul.t that synchronizes the memory access to the remote public window 
vas 
hb 
−→ vac ⇒ vas co 
−→ vac and vac hb 
−→ vas ⇒ vac co 
−→ vas (15) 
if vac.o = vas.o. 
Flush. A flush can be used to synchronize RMAs. A flush sfl has the same semantics 
as an unlock. It also generates a virtual synchronization action vas at its target with 
the same rules as stated in Equation (15). A flush all sfla behaves like a flush to all 
processes. Flush local sfll completes remote operations locally: 

r∗

## po −→ sfll ⇒ r∗

co −→ sfll if r∗ .t = sfll.t. (16) Flush local all completes all remote operations locally:

r∗

po −→ sflla ⇒ r∗

co −→ sflla. (17)

Flush local does not create a virtual action. Sync. A win sync call sws has the effect synchronizing remote and local accesses. (l∗| vac) hb −→ sws ⇒ (l∗| vac) co −→ sws and sws hb −→ (l∗| vac) ⇒ sws co −→ (l∗| vac). (18) Local load/Store. For normal reads and writes interacting with RMA calls,

l∗

po
−→ r∗ ⇒ l∗

co −→ r∗ . (19) ACM Transactions on Parallel Computing, Vol. 2, No. 2, Article 9, Publication date: June 2015.

Consistent remote operations. For virtual communication actions in the unified mem ory window,

l∗ hb

−→ vac ⇒ l∗

co −→ vac. (20)

3.3. Conflicts and Races 
We now specify the rules for defined memory operations in MPI RMA. Those are needed 
to reason about the possible result of a series of memory actions originating at different 
processes. 
3.3.1. Conflicting Actions. In the separate memory model (see Section 2.5), two memory 
actions x and y are called conflicting if they are directed toward overlapping memory 
locations at the same process and either (1) one of the two operations is a put rcp, (2) 
exactly one of the operations is an accumulate (ra∗ ), or (3) one operation is a get (rcg) 
and the second one a local store (ls). In addition, remote writing operations (rcp and 
ra∗ ) that access the same process conflict with local store (ls) operations issued by the 
target process regardless of the accessed location. 
In the unified model, two actions x and y are called conflicting if they are directed 
toward overlapping memory locations at the same process and either (1) one of the two 
operations is a put (rcp), (2) exactly one of the operations is an accumulate (ra∗ ), or (3) 
one operation is a get (rcg) and the second one a local store (ls). 
3.3.2. Races. A data race between two conflicting operations x and y exists if they are 
not ordered by both 
hb 
−→ and co 
−→ relations 
¬ (x cohb 
−−→ y ∨ y cohb 
−−→ x); (21) 

that is,

x hb y ∨ x co y. (22) In other words, for a program to be free of data races, all conflicting accesses must be ordered by

cohb 
−−→ . 
3.3.3. Conditions for Well-Defined Memory Semantics. Only data race–free executions have 
well-defined memory semantics. If an execution has well-defined semantics, then a 
read action ll will always return the last written value (last as defined by the consistent 
happens-before order): 
W((ll| vac)) cohb 
−−→ (ll| vac) ∧ V ((ll| vac)) = V (W((ll| vac))). (23) 
In addition, the following property is guaranteed: 
W((ll| vac)) cohb 
−−→ ls cohb 
−−→ (ll| vac), then (ll| vac).rl = ls.wl ∧ V ((ll| vac)) = V (W((ll| vac))). 
(24) 
In other words, in a program with well-defined memory semantics, for every read action 
(ll| vac), 

¬ ((ll| vac) cohb −−→ W((ll| vac))). (25)

3.4. Ordering Rules for Accumulates 
Let x and y be of type ra∗ and update the same variable: 
x.wl = y.wl ∧ x po 
−→ y ⇒ x co 
−→ y. (26) 
However, the user can relax any of the possible combinations of write and read ordering 
(waw, war, raw, rar). For local ls and ll memory actions and the local reads and writes 

Fig. 7. Simple examples for active and passive synchronization.

associated with r∗ actions, we assume sequential ordering. The effects cannot be ob 
served remotely, as no consistent ordering exists for those operations; thus, many local 
compiler transformations (e.g., changing the order of instructions) that do not modify 
sequential correctness are possible. Remote put and get rc∗ actions and r∗ actions with 
different destination addresses or processes have no specified ordering. 
3.5. Eventual Remote Completion 
The unified memory model enables the user to “poll” on a location and wait for a 
message to arrive without additional MPI operations. Thus, a flush or unlock on a 
process A could complete an r∗ action targeted at process B, and process B could wait 
in an infinite loop for the arrival for the message. 
The vac action that is generated on process B will not have a happens-before relation, 
whereas it will have a (sul| sfl| sfla) co 
−→ vac. If process B waits (potentially an unbounded 
number of steps) for the message to arrive (by polling on r∗ .wl), it is guaranteed that 
the message will eventually arrive; that is, a consistent happens-before relation will 
be established between the (sul| sfl| sfla) and one of the polling reads. However, MPI 
provides no timing guarantees, and thus the process may need to wait for an unbounded 
number of steps. 
3.6. Shared Memory Windows 
All of the preceding discussions apply to shared memory windows. As stated earlier, 
however, there are no guarantees about the consistency order of ll and ls actions 
(which can now be observed directly by remote processes), as this is a function of 
the architecture’s memory model (e.g., x86 [Owens et al. 2009] or POWER [Adve and 
Gharachorloo 1996; Sarkar et al. 2012]). 
3.7. Examples 
We show several examples for using the semantic definition to reason about the va 
lidity and outcome of RMA operations. To avoid cluttering the figures, we do not show 
program order ( 

po −→ ). Each statement at a process is ordered with regard to the previous statements at the same process in

po −→ , and thus hb −→ . Figure 7(a) shows a simple example with fence synchronization. The variables x and v are accessed with conflicting operations, but the fences guarantee

cohb −−→ ordering. Thus, the result of this example trace is defined, and the print(v) will always output “0.”

Fig. 8. Examples for polling on a memory location. The abbreviations rap and rag stand for remote atomic put (accumulate with replace) and remote atomic get (get accumulate with no-op), respectively.

The numbers in brackets at the orders in all following figures state the rule number that generates this order. The formal model also supports reasoning about mixing RMA programming with traditional point-to-point programming. Figure 7(b) shows how a passive mode unlock is combined with a barrier to establish consistency and happens-before orders. The conflicting accesses are again acting on x and v. The barrier guarantees a

hb −→ ordering

between the assignment of x and the remote get. The win sync guarantees

co −→ at process 1 (for the separate model, it is unnecessary in the unified model), and the unlock together with the vas and vac actions guarantees

co −→ order between the conflicting accesses. Thus, the memory semantics are well defined, and the read will always read “0.” In Figure 8(a), process 0 puts a value into process 1’s window, which waits for the value’s arrival. In this example,

hb −→ is guaranteed to the virtual communication action (vac), which itself is not ordered with regard to the actions at process 1. However, since process 1 is in an infinite loop, vac will eventually appear in this loop and thus introduce an eventual

hb −→ and co −→ ordering. Thus, this program is correct in the unified memory model, and v will have the value “1” at process 1 eventually. Figure 8(b) shows polling in the separate memory model. This schedule is undefined since the vac action can occur between a sync and a local load and may thus lead to undefined outcome of the local load. Figure 9(a) shows an example where a consistency edge is missing for a local access. The accesses to x are conflicting on process 0, and there is no

co −→ ; thus, the outcome is undefined. Figure 9(b) shows an example with correct consistency ordering. Two conflicting accesses to x at process 1 are synchronized with a flush (

co −→ ) and with a send/recv pair (

hb −→ ). The outcome of this example is well defined to print “1.” Figure 10 shows an example for a missing happens-before ordering. The

co −→ ordering at process 1 is established because of the stronger guarantees of the unified model; however, there is no

hb −→ ordering such that vac could execute concurrently with the write, making the outcome undefined.

Fig. 9. Examples for consistency ordering.

Fig. 10. Missing happens-before ordering.

4. USE CASES AND EXAMPLES 
In this section, we discuss several possible uses of the new RMA interface. Some of those 
applications can be implemented with other mechanisms, such as traditional MPI-1 
communication or even other new MPI-3 features such as neighborhood collectives 
[Hoefler and Schneider 2012]. We note that RMA programming can be faster because 
of the absence of message-matching overhead; however, it is impossible to make general 
statements about performance across a wide variety of architectures. Here, we focus on 
MPI-3 RMA examples and provide some high-level hints to potential users. We often 
cannot provide detailed advice about which mechanism to use; however, we encourage 
MPI vendors to provide detailed performance models for all operations to help guide 
the user’s decisions. 
4.1. Stencil Boundary Exchange 
Many applications follow the stencil parallel pattern—the basis of many PDE and ODE 
computations. In this pattern, each process is running an iterative computation and 
communicates with a set of neighbors in each iteration. The communication exchanges 
the boundary zones of the local process domains. The neighborhood relations are often 
fixed for several iterations (or, in fact, may never change). The computation generally 
follows the bulk synchronous paradigm of repeated computation and communication 
phases and may support overlapping of computation and communication. 
If each of the p processes communicates with a large number of neighbors k (k > 
log(p)), then fence synchronization may be the best solution. However, if the number 
of neighbors is relatively small (or constant) and the neighborhood relationship is not 

Fig. 11. 1D stencil boundary exchange example using fence (left) and general active target synchronization (right).

Fig. 12. Put and get protocols for passive target mode synchronization.

changing often, then the general active target synchronization seems most natural. 
Remote memory put operations are often faster than get. If the target address can be 
computed at the origin, using put operations is often beneficial. Figure 11 shows an 
example execution of the 1D stencil exchange with overlap using fence and general 
active target synchronization. Compute inner is independent of the halo-zone values, 
and compute outer then computes the boundary that depends on the halo zone. 
One can also use passive target synchronization to implement stencil codes. The 
benefit of passive mode is that separate targets can be completed separately and a 
target process can pipeline the computations that use the incoming data. Depending on 
the operation, different protocols must be used. For put, the source process simply puts 
the message into the target window, flushes, and notifies the target (either by setting 
a notification byte or with a message). In addition, the target has to notify the source 
when the data can be overwritten in the next iteration to satisfy the output dependence 
at the target window. In a get-based protocol, the origin would send a notification to 
the target, which then fetches the data, flushes, and processes the data. Both protocols 
require two remote accesses (or messages), and the better protocol depends on the put 
and get performance of the target system. Gerstenberger et al. [2013] demonstrated 
substantial speedups at large scale for the get-based protocol. Figure 12 shows put and 
get protocols for passive target synchronization. 
4.2. Fast Fourier Transform 
Fast Fourier transforms (FFTs) are an important kernel in many scientific applications. 
The computation patterns can often be arranged in different layouts by using twiddle 
factors. Here, we discuss a 3D FFT (X × Y × Z) using a 1D data decomposition as a 
case study. 

Fig. 13. Example computation of a 3D FFT. 
In the decomposition, each process has a set of 2D planes. If we assume that the X 
dimension is distributed initially, each process can perform local Y-Z 2D FFTs. Then, a 
global transpose step follows such that X is contiguous at each process for performing 
the final 1D FFT. An optional transpose can be used to copy the data back into the 
original layout if needed. 
An optimized RMA implementation could issue puts to remote processes as soon as 
the data becomes available (e.g., start all puts for a plane after the Y-Ztransform of this 
plane completed). After all planes have been started, all processes end the epoch with 
a fence before moving to the X FFT. This scheme enables high overlap of computation 
and communication. Figure 13 shows an example decomposition and execution of a 3D 
FFT. 
4.3. Distributed Locks 
The new atomic operations added in MPI-3 make it possible to build asynchronous, dis 
tributed, lock-free data structures. Such structures are central to a variety of scalable 
algorithms; the well-known MCS mutual exclusion algorithm [Mellor-Crummey and 
Scott 1991], for example, uses a lock-free queue. In this queue, the process at the head 
holds the lock and forwards it to the next process when it has completed its critical 
section. Thus, the queue supports two operations: removing the element at the head of 
the queue and adding new elements to the tail. 
The MCS algorithm uses a tail pointer in a fixed location at a specific process, which 
is initialized to MPI_PROC_NULL. In addition, each process maintains a single queue el 
ement, which contains a next pointer that is also initialized to MPI_PROC_NULL. These 
pointers are integer values that will be used to enqueue processes by rank. Thus, 
an MPI window is created, where each process posts an integer location that will be 
used as its queue element (displacement ELEM DISP = 0), and the process hosting the 
mutex adds a second integer element that will be used as the tail pointer (byte dis 
placement TAIL DISP = sizeof(int)). Once the window has been created, all processes 
call MPI_Win_lock_all to initiate shared-mode access, as accesses will be performed by 
using only atomic operations. 
As shown in Listing 2, when processes request the lock, they atomically exchange 
their rank, which acts as a pointer to their list element (initialized to MPI_PROC_NULL), 
with the tail pointer. If the tail pointer is MPI_PROC_NULL, the process has successfully 
acquired the lock. Otherwise, it updates the element of the process that was the old 

Listing 2. MCS mutex lock acquire algorithm.

list tail and waits for that process to forward the lock. All concurrent accesses are 
performed by using atomic operations to enable a shared lock access mode. 
Similarly, when releasing the lock, shown in Listing 3, processes perform an atomic 
compare-and-swap of the tail pointer. If the process releasing the lock is still at the tail 
of the queue, the tail pointer is reset to MPI_PROC_NULL. If not, the process forwards the 
lock to the next process in the queue, potentially waiting for that process to update the 
releasing process’s queue element. As an optimization, processes can first check their 
local queue element to determine whether the lock can be forwarded without checking 
the tail pointer. 
5. SUMMARY 
In this article, we described the MPI-3 one-sided interface, presented the semantics 
in a semiformal way, and showed several use cases. This new interface is expected 
to deliver the highest performance on novel network architectures that offer RDMA 
access directly in hardware. Highly optimized implementations of MPI-2 RMA exist 
[Larsson Traff et al. 2000], but the interface has only been adopted in very limited 
settings. The new MPI-3 RMA interface enables an extremely efficient implementation 
on modern hardware [Gerstenberger et al. 2013] while offering several convenient 
and easy-to-use programming constructs such as process groups, exposed memory 
abstraction (windows), MPI datatypes, and different synchronization models. The RMA 
interface separates communication and synchronization and offers different collective 
and noncollective synchronization modes. In addition, it enables the programmer to 
choose between implicit notification in active target mode and explicit notification in 
passive target mode. This large variety of options enables users to create complex 
programs. 
Our formalization of remote access semantics enables one to reason about complex 
applications written in MPI-3 RMA. This can be used to prove that programs have 
defined outcomes, and one can easily derive deadlock conditions from our specification 
of happens-before orders. Thus, we expect that the semantics will lead to powerful tools 
to support programmers in using MPI for RMA. 
We provided three examples: (1) a stencil exchange pattern to show a possible im 
plementation of neighbor exchanges, (2) a fast Fourier transformation to demonstrate 

Listing 3. MCS mutex lock release algorithm.

the capabilities to overlap communication and computation, and (3) an MCS lock to demonstrate a more complex data structure in the passive mode model.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Martin Vechev and Andrei Dan for many helpful discussions and comments on the semantics. We thank the anonymous reviewers for their many insightful comments and valuable suggestions.

REFERENCES 
Sarita V. Adve and Kourosh Gharachorloo. 1996. Shared memory consistency models: A tutorial. Computer 
29, 12, 66–76. 
Robert Alverson, Duncan Roweth, and Larry Kaplan. 2010. The Gemini System interconnect. In Proceedings 
of the 2010 18th IEEE Symposium on High Performance Interconnects (HOTI’10). IEEE, Los Alamitos, 
CA, 83–87. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HOTI.2010.23 
Hans-J. Boehm. 2005. Threads cannot be implemented as a library. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 40, 6, 261–268. 
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1064978.1065042 
Hans-J. Boehm and Sarita V. Adve. 2008. Foundations of the C++ concurrency memory model. ACM SIG 
PLAN Notices 43, 6, 68–78. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1379022.1375591 
Philip Buonadonna, Andrew Geweke, and David Culler. 1998. An implementation and analysis of the virtual 
interface architecture. In Proceedings of the 1998 ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing (Super 
computing’98). IEEE, Los Alamitos, CA, USA, 1–15. 
Bradford L. Chamberlain, David Callahan, and Hans P. Zima. 2007. Parallel programmability and the 
Chapel language. International Journal of High Performance Computing Applications 21, 3, 291–312. 
Philippe Charles, Christian Grothoff, Vijay Saraswat, Christopher Donawa, Allan Kielstra, Kemal Ebcioglu, 
Christoph von Praun, and Vivek Sarkar. 2005. X10: An object-oriented approach to non-uniform cluster 
computing. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 40, 10, 519–538. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1103845.1094852 
Anthony Danalis, Lori Pollock, Martin Swany, and John Cavazos. 2009. MPI-aware compiler optimiza 
tions for improving communication-computation overlap. In Proceedings of the 23rd International 

Conference on Supercomputing (ICS’09). ACM, New York, NY, 316–325. DOI:http://dx.doi.rg/10. 1145/1542275.1542321 Kaushik Datta, Mark Murphy, Vasily Volkov, Samuel Williams, Jonathan Carter, Leonid Oliker, David Patterson, John Shalf, and Katherine Yelick. 2008. Stencil computation optimization and auto tuning on state-of-the-art multicore architectures. In Proceedings of the 2008 ACM/IEEE Con ference on Supercomputing (SC’08). IEEE, Los Alamitos, CA, Article No. 4. http://dl.acm.org/ citation.cfm?id= 1413370.1413375

Greg Faanes, Abdulla Bataineh, Duncan Roweth, Tom Court, Edwin Froese, Bob Alverson, Tim Johnson, Joe Kopnick, Mike Higgins, and James Reinhard. 2012. Cray Cascade: A scalable HPC system based on a Dragonfly network. In Proceedings of the International Conference on High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage, and Analysis (SC’12). IEEE, Los Alamitos, CA, Article No. 103. http://dl.acm. org/citation.cfm?id= 2388996.2389136

Robert Gerstenberger, Maciej Besta, and Torsten Hoefler. 2013. Enabling highly-scalable remote memory 
access programming with MPI-3 one sided. In Proceedings of the International Conference on High 
Performance Computing, Networking, Storage, and Analysis (SC’13). ACM, New York, NY, Article No. 
53. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2503210.2503286 
Torsten Hoefler, James Dinan, Darius Buntinas, Pavan Balaji, Brian Barrett, Ron Brightwell, William 
Gropp, Vivek Kale, and Rajeev Thakur. 2012. Leveraging MPI’s one-sided communication interface for 
shared-memory programming. In Proceedings of the 19th European Conference on Recent Advances in the 
Message Passing Interface (EuroMPI’12). 132–141. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33518-1_18 
Torsten Hoefler, Rolf Rabenseifner, Hubert Ritzdorf, Bronis R. de Supinski, Rajeev Thakur, and Jesper 
Larsson Traff. 2011. The scalable process topology interface of MPI 2.2. ¨ Concurrency and Computation: 
Practice and Experience 23, 4, 293–310. 
Torsten Hoefler and Timo Schneider. 2012. Optimization principles for collective neighborhood com 
munications. In Proceedings of the International Conference on High Performance Computing, Net 
working, Storage, and Analysis (SC’12). IEEE, Los Alamitos, CA, Article No. 98. http://dl.acm.org/ 
citation.cfm?id= 2388996.2389129 
Torsten Hoefler and Marc Snir. 2011. Writing parallel libraries with MPI—common practice, issues, and 
extensions. In Proceedings of the 18th European MPI Users’ Group Conference on Recent Advances in the 
Message Passing Interface (EuroMPI’11). 345–355. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id= 2042476.2042521 
Sven Karlsson and Mats Brorsson. 1998. A comparative characterization of communication patterns in appli 
cations using MPI and shared memory on an IBM SP2. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop 
on Network-Based Parallel Computing: Communication, Architecture, and Applications (CANPC’98). 
189–201. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id= 646092.680546 
Jesper Larsson Traff, Hubert Ritzdorf, and Rolf Hempel. 2000. The implementation of MPI-2 one-sided 
communication for the NEC SX-5. In Proceedings of the 2000 ACM/IEEE Conference on Super 
computing (Supercomputing’00). IEEE, Los Alamitos, CA, Article No. 1. http://dl.acm.org/citation. 
cfm?id= 370049.370878 
Sela Mador-Haim, Rajeev Alur, and Milo M. K. Martin. 2011. Litmus tests for comparing memory consistency 
models: How long do they need to be? In Proceedings of the 48th Design Automation Conference (DAC’11). 
ACM, New York, NY, 504–509. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2024724.2024842 
Jeremy Manson, William Pugh, and Sarita V. Adve. 2005. The Java memory model. In Proceedings of the 
32nd ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL’05). ACM, 
New York, NY, 378–391. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1040305.1040336 
John Mellor-Crummey, Laksono Adhianto, William N. Scherer III, and Guohua Jin. 2009. A new vision for 
coarray Fortran. In Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Partitioned Global Address Space Programming 
Models (PGAS’09). ACM, New York, NY, Article No. 5. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1809961.1809969 
John Mellor-Crummey and Michael L. Scott. 1991. Algorithms for scalable synchronization on shared 
memory multiprocessors. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems 9, 1, 21–65. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10. 
1145/103727.103729 
MPI Forum. 2009. MPI: A Message-Passing Interface Standard. Version 2.2. 
MPI Forum. 2012. MPI: A Message-Passing Interface Standard. Version 3.0. 
Jaroslaw Nieplocha, Robert J. Harrison, and Richard J. Littlefield. 1996. Global arrays: A nonuniform 
memory access programming model for high-performance computers. Journal of Supercomputing 10, 2, 
169–189. 
Robert W. Numrich and John Reid. 1998. Co-array Fortran for parallel programming. ACM SIGPLAN Fortran 
Forum 17, 2, 1–31. 
Scott Owens, Susmit Sarkar, and Peter Sewell. 2009. A better x86 memory model: x86-TSO. In Theorem 
Proving in Higher Order Logics. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 5674. Springer, 391–407. 
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-03359-9_27 

Susmit Sarkar, Kayvan Memarian, Scott Owens, Mark Batty, Peter Sewell, Luc Maranget, Jade Alglave, 
and Derek Williams. 2012. Synchronising C/C++ and power. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 47, 6, 311–322. 
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2345156.2254102 
Timo Schneider, Robert Gerstenberger, and Torsten Hoefler. 2013. Compiler optimizations for non-contiguous 
remote data movement. In Proceedings of the 26th International Workshop on Languages and Compilers 
for Parallel Computing. 
Piyush Shivam, Pete Wyckoff, and Dhabaleswar Panda. 2001. EMP: Zero-copy OS-bypass NIC-driven 
Gigabit Ethernet message passing. In Proceedings of the 2001 ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercom 
puting (Supercomputing’01). ACM, New York, NY, 57–57. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/582034.582091 
Emina Torlak, Mandana Vaziri, and Julian Dolby. 2010. MemSAT: Checking axiomatic specifications of 
memory models. ACM SIGPLAN Notices 45, 6, 341–350. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1809028.1806635 
Jesper Larsson Traff. 2002. Implementing the MPI process topology mechanism. In Proceedings of the 
2002 ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing (Supercomputing’02). IEEE, Los Alamitos, CA, 1–14. 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id= 762761.762767 
UPC Consortium. 2005. UPC Language Specifications, v1.2. Technical Report LBNL-59208. Lawrence 
Berkeley National Laboratory. 
Jeremiah Willcock, Torsten Hoefler, Nick Edmonds, and Andrew Lumsdaine. 2011. Active pebbles: Parallel 
programming for data-driven applications. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Supercom 
puting (ICS’11). ACM, New York, NY, 235–244. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1995896.1995934 
Tim S. Woodall, Galen M. Shipman, George Bosilca, and Arthur B. Maccabe. 2006. High performance RDMA 
protocols in HPC. In Proceedings of the 13th European PVM/MPI User’s Group Conference on Re 
cent Advances in Parallel Virtual Machine and Message Passing Interface (EuroPVM/MPI’06). 76–85. 
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/11846802_18 
Chaoran Yang, Wesley Bland, John Mellor-Crummey, and Pavan Balaji. 2014. Portable, MPI-interoperable 
Coarray Fortran. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of 
Parallel Programming (PPoPP’14). ACM, New York, NY, 81–92. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2555243. 
2555270 

Received March 2013; accepted December 2014

