Checkpointing à la Young/Daly: An Overview
Anne Benoit
anne.benoit@inria.fr
LIP, ENS Lyon, France
Yishu Du
yishu.du@inria.fr
Tongji Univ., Shanghai, China
& LIP, ENS Lyon, France
Thomas Herault
herault@icl.utk.edu
Univ. Tenn. Knoxville, USA
Loris Marchal
loris.marchal@inria.fr
LIP, ENS Lyon, France
Guillaume Pallez
guillaume.pallez@inria.fr
Inria Bordeaux, France
Lucas Perotin
lucas.perotin@inria.fr
LIP, ENS Lyon, France
Yves Robert
yves.robert@inria.fr
LIP, ENS Lyon, France
& Univ. Tenn. Knoxville, USA
Hongyang Sun
hongyang.sun@ku.edu
University of Kansas, USA
Frédéric Vivien
frederic.vivien@inria.fr
Inria & LIP, ENS Lyon, France
ABSTRACT
The Young/Daly formula provides an approximation of the optimal checkpoint period for a parallel application executing on a
supercomputing platform. The Young/Daly formula was originally
designed for preemptible tightly-coupled applications. We provide
some background and survey various application scenarios to assess
the usefulness and limitations of the formula.
KEYWORDS
Checkpoint, Optimal period, Young/Daly formula.
ACM Reference Format:
Anne Benoit, Yishu Du, Thomas Herault, Loris Marchal, Guillaume Pallez,
Lucas Perotin, Yves Robert, Hongyang Sun, and Frédéric Vivien. 2022. Checkpointing à la Young/Daly: An Overview. In 14th International Conference on
Contemporary Computing (IC3), August 4-6, 2022, Noida, India. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3549206.3549328
1 INTRODUCTION
Checkpointing is the standard technique to protect applications
running on HPC (High-Performance Computing) platforms. Every
day, the platform experiences a few fail-stop errors (or failures, we
use both terms indifferently). After each failure, the application
executing on the faulty processor (and likely on many other processors for a large parallel application) is interrupted and must be
restarted. Without checkpointing, all the work executed for the
application is lost. With checkpointing, the execution can resume
from the last checkpoint, after some downtime (enroll a spare to
replace the faulty processor) and a recovery (read the checkpoint).
Consider a parallel application executing on an HPC platform
whose nodes are subject to fail-stop errors. How frequently should
it be checkpointed so that its expected execution time is minimized? There is a well-known trade-off (see Figure 1): taking too
many checkpoints leads to high overhead, especially when there
are few failures while taking too few checkpoints leads to a large
re-execution time after each failure. The optimal checkpointing
period is (approximately) given by the Young/Daly formula as
𝑊YD =
√︁
2𝜇𝐶 [21, 67], where 𝜇 is the application MTBF (Mean
Time Between Failures) and 𝐶 is the checkpoint duration.
Figure 1: Trade-off for the optimal checkpoint period.
This paper provides an overview of the applicability and robustness of the Young/Daly formula for different application scenarios.
There are two main frameworks. The first part of the survey deals
with preemptible applications, which may be checkpointed at any
time step. In this context, checkpointing is a coordinated process
and involves all the processors enrolled in the execution of the
application. The second part of the survey focuses on task systems,
where applications are composed of a set of atomic tasks, possibly
with inter-dependences. In this context, checkpoints are task-based
and can be taken only at the end of a task. Only the processors that
execute a task are involved in its checkpoint. The problem is then
to decide which tasks to checkpoint.
The paper is organized as follows. We first survey preemptible
applications in Section 2. Then we deal with task systems in Section 3. We address some questions related to uncertainty in Section 4.
Finally, we conclude with some open questions in Section 6.
IC3 2022, August 4-6, 2022, Noida, IndiaAnne Benoit, Yishu Du, Thomas Herault, Loris Marchal, Guillaume Pallez, Lucas Perotin, Yves Robert, Hongyang Sun, and Frédéric Vivien
2 PREEMPTIBLE APPLICATIONS
In this section, we deal with parallel applications that can be checkpointed at any time. In scheduling terminology, the applications
are preemptible.
2.1 Background
Platform and applications. Consider a large parallel platform
with 𝑚 identical processors, or nodes. These nodes are subject to
fail-stop errors, or failures. A failure interrupts the execution of the
node and provokes the loss of its whole memory.
Consider a parallel application running on several nodes: when
one of these nodes is struck by a failure, the state of the application is lost, and execution must restart from scratch unless a faulttolerance mechanism has been deployed. The classical technique to
deal with failures makes use of a checkpoint-restart mechanism: the
state of the application is periodically checkpointed, i.e., all participating nodes take a checkpoint simultaneously. This is the standard
coordinated checkpointing protocol, which is routinely used on
large-scale platforms [19], where each node writes its share of application data to stable storage (checkpoint of duration 𝐶). When
a failure occurs, the platform is unavailable during a downtime
𝐷, which is the time to enroll a spare processor that will replace
the faulty processor [21, 34]. Then, all application nodes (including
the spare) recover from the last valid checkpoint in a coordinated
manner, reading the checkpoint file from stable storage (recovery
of duration 𝑅). Finally, the execution is resumed from that point
on, rather than starting again from scratch. Note that failures can
strike during checkpoint and recovery, but not during downtime
(otherwise there are no differences between downtime and recovery and we can simply include the downtime in the recovery time).
When a failure hits a processor, that processor is replaced by a spare.
This amounts to starting anew with a fresh processor. In the terminology of stochastic processes, the faulty processor is rejuvenated.
However, all the other processors are not rejuvenated: this would
be infeasible due to the multitudinous spares needed!
Failures. We assume that each node experiences failures whose
inter-arrival times follow Independent and Identically Distributed
(IID) random variables obeying an arbitrary probability distribution
D. We only assume that D is continuous and of finite expectation
and variance, a condition satisfied by all standard distributions. We
let 𝜇ind denote the expectation of D, also known as the individual
processor MTBF. Even if each node has an MTBF of several years,
large-scale parallel platforms are composed of so many nodes that
they will experience several failures per day [18, 28]. Hence, a
parallel application using a significant fraction of the platform will
typically experience a failure every few hours. More precisely, an
application executing with 𝑝 processors has an MTBF 𝜇 =
𝜇ind
𝑝
:
intuitively, the application is struck by failures at a rate which is 𝑝
times higher than that of each enrolled processor. We come back to
this statement in Section 2.3.
Checkpointing strategies. Given a parallel application of length
𝑇base (base time without checkpoints nor failures), the optimization
problem is to decide when and how often to take a checkpoint,
to minimize the expected execution time of the application. The
application is divided into 𝑁c segments of length 𝑊𝑖, 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑁c,
each followed by a checkpoint of length 𝐶. Of course Í𝑁c
𝑖=1𝑊𝑖 =
𝑇base. We add a final checkpoint at the end of the last segment,
e.g., to write final outputs to stable storage. Symmetrically, we
add an initial recovery when re-executing the first segment of
an application (e.g., to read inputs from stable storage) if it has
been struck by a failure before completing the checkpoint. Adding
a final checkpoint and an initial recovery brings symmetry and
simplifies formulas, but it is not at all mandatory: see [12] for an
extension relaxing either or both assumptions. The question is then
to determine the number 𝑁c of segments and their lengths 𝑊𝑖.
2.2 The Young/Daly Formula
Here is an intuitive (but simplified) derivation of the Young/Daly
formula for the optimal checkpoint period. Owing to the addition
of the final checkpoint and the initial recovery, all segments of
the application have the same shape. It is thus natural (by symmetry) to assume that they have the same length 𝑊 in the optimal
solution. Thus we assume that checkpoints are taken periodically,
after every 𝑊 unit of work. Now, after every 𝑊 unit of work, we
spend 𝐶 seconds to checkpoint, which corresponds to a first source
of waste 𝑆1 =
𝐶
𝑊 +𝐶
. Here the waste is defined as the fraction of
time during which the application is not performing useful computations; checkpoint, recovery, downtime, and re-execution do
not count as useful computations. 𝑆1 is the failure-free waste. The
second source of waste 𝑆2 is due to failures: each time a failure
strikes, which happens every 𝜇 seconds on average, we lose 𝐷 + 𝑅
for downtime and recovery, and then we have to re-execute some
work, namely the work performed since the last checkpoint (or
from the beginning of the execution if none has been taken yet).
On average again, the failure strikes in the middle of the segment:
sometimes before, sometimes after, hence, on average after 𝑊 +𝐶
2
seconds. We obtain 𝑆2 =
1
𝜇
(𝐷 + 𝑅 +
𝑊 +𝐶
2
). 𝑆1 is the failure-induced
waste. Altogether, both sources of waste approximately add up, so
we have to find 𝑊 that minimizes 𝑆1 + 𝑆2. We further simplify the
solution by assuming that𝑊 must be an order of magnitude higher
than the fault-tolerance parameters 𝐷,𝐶, 𝑅. This is a necessary condition for the waste to remain reasonably low. This leads to 𝑆1 ≈
𝐶
𝑊
and 𝑆2 ≈
𝑊
2𝜇
. The total waste 𝑆1 + 𝑆2 ≈
𝐶
𝑊 +
𝑊
2𝜇
is minimum for
𝑊YD =
√︁
2𝜇𝐶 (1)
This is nothing else than the famous Young/Daly formula! Finally,
note that 𝑆1 = 𝑆2 for𝑊YD, which corroborates the intuition given in
Figure 1 that both sources of waste, failure-free and failure-induced,
should be balanced in the optimal solution. See [34] for a more
detailed derivation using the waste argument.
2.3 Accuracy
Recall that each node experiences failures whose inter-arrival times
follow IID random variables obeying a probability distribution D.
When D is Exp(𝜆), i.e., an Exponential distribution of rate 𝜆, the
framework is well-understood. This is because the inter-arrival
times of the failures that strike an application with 𝑝 processors are
IID random variables obeying an Exponential distribution Exp(𝑝𝜆).
This is due to the memoryless property of the Exponential distribution: when a failure strikes one processor, that processor is
rejuvenated, while the remaining 𝑝 − 1 processors are not. With an
Checkpointing à la Young/Daly IC3 2022, August 4-6, 2022, Noida, India
arbitrary distribution D, the time to the next failure would depend
upon the history of these 𝑝−1 processors: for each of them, the time
to their next failure depends upon when their last failure struck.
This is not the case for an Exponential distribution, owing to its
memoryless property: after a failure on any of the 𝑝 processors, the
time to the next failure remains the same random variable Exp(𝜆)
for each of them, rejuvenated or not. Therefore, the time to the
next failure for the application obeys an Exp(𝑝𝜆) distribution, as
the minimum of 𝑝 Exp(𝜆) distributions. From the resilience point
of view, the application executes on a single processor of fault rate
𝑝𝜆! Owing to this observation, one can formally derive that the
optimal checkpoint strategy is periodic, and compute the optimal
checkpoint period. The derivation is a bit technical and the optimal
segment length𝑊opt is obtained using the Lambert W function. But
comfortingly, a first-order approximation of 𝑊opt is 𝑊YD, the value
given by the Young/Daly formula. See [12, 16] for details on the
derivation.
Now, any continuous distribution D other than Exponential is
not memoryless, and the optimal checkpoint strategy is unknown
in that case. The bad news is that the most accurate probability distributions modeling processor failures are LogNormal [33]
and Weibull [52, 53, 60, 61] instead of Exponential. For instance,
LANL failure traces are best fit by Weibull distributions of different
shapes [27]. Weibull distributions with a shape parameter smaller
than 1 experience infant mortality; for those distributions, it is
known that periodic checkpointing is not optimal. Intuitively, the
length of a segment between two consecutive checkpoints should
increase with time, as the instantaneous failure rate decreases. However, the good news is that the MTBF can still be defined as the
limit:
lim
𝑇→∞
𝑛(𝑇 )
𝑇
=
𝜇ind
𝑝
where 𝑛(𝑇 ) is the expected number of failures striking an application with 𝑝 processors in the time interval [0,𝑇 ]. This limit exists
for any regular distribution D. A natural heuristic is to use a periodic checkpoint strategy, with a segment length given by the
Young/Daly formula and using that latter value for the MTBF. It is
unknown how this approach is close to the optimal but it seems
good enough in many scenarios. See [12, 16] for an assessment of
this heuristic, and for a comparison with other checkpoint strategies which aim at maximizing work or efficiency until the next
failure.
2.4 Extensions
In Section 2.2, we have shown how to derive the optimal checkpoint
period when the objective is to minimize the expected completion
time of the application. We used a simplified model where no computation could take place while checkpointing. Modern processors
could run several threads in parallel and compute while executing
I/O transfers. A first extension to the framework of Section 2.2 is to
extend the model with a linear slowdown factor 𝛼 ∈ [0, 1], where,
say, 𝛼 = 0.5 means that computations progress at half the main
speed when checkpointing. The two extreme values are 𝛼 = 0 when
checkpoints are blocking (no overlap), and 𝛼 = 1 when execution
can progress with no penalty while a checkpoint is taken (full overlap). The Young/Daly formula becomes 𝑊YD =
√︁
2𝜇(1 − 𝛼)𝐶. Note
that 𝛼 = 0 leads to the original Young/Daly formula, while 𝛼 = 1
leads to 𝑊YD = 0, which means that one should checkpoint all the
time if checkpointing is free! Of course in practical scenarios we
expect 𝛼 < 1. See [34] for more details.
Another extension to the framework of Section 2.2 is to target a different optimization objective: instead of minimizing the
(expected) total execution time, one would aim at minimizing the
(expected) total energy consumed to execute the application. This
objective is important both for economic and environmental reasons. The optimal period 𝑊energy to minimize energy consumption
is different from the Young/Daly formula mainly because the power
spent when computing is not the same as power spent when checkpointing. More precisely, the power consumption at each time step
of the application relies on three components:
• PStatic: base power consumed when platform is switched on,
• PCal: when the platform is computing, we have to consider the
CPU overhead in addition to the static power PStatic.
• PI/O: similarly, this is the power overhead due to file I/O. This
supplementary power consumption is induced by checkpointing,
or when recovering from a failure.
A key parameter to compare𝑊energy and𝑊YD is the ratio PStatic+PI/O
PStatic+PCal
.
See [3, 27, 29] and the references therein for further details.
Finally, another optimization objective is to minimize the expected volume of I/O operations due to checkpointing and recovery.
This objective is important because I/O resources are scarce in HPC
platforms. Typical HPC applications execute on dedicated computing nodes but share the I/O bandwidth of the platform with other
applications. Hence, decreasing the volume of I/O operations by
each application is likely to improve the global throughput of the
platform. A natural question is then: given a single application that
executes on the platform, can we increase the checkpoint period
significantly beyond the Young/Daly formula without sacrificing
too much in performance? Note that we have a bi-criteria optimization problem here because we need to trade off performance
with I/O pressure. Note also that a single application running on
the platform may be a capability workload that spans the entire
platform. The answer to the question is yes: Arunagiri et al. [1]
studied longer, sub-optimal periods for a single application, with
the intent of reducing I/O pressure. They showed, both analytically
and empirically using four real platforms, that a decrease in the I/O
requirement can be achieved with only a small increase in waste.
However, space-sharing HPC platforms for the concurrent execution of multiple parallel applications is the prevalent usage strategy
in today’s HPC centers, and capability workloads that span the
entire platform are much less common [65]. The question becomes
how to avoid contention when several applications try to checkpoint at the same time: the I/O bandwidth will be shared among
these applications, their checkpoint time will increase, and the
Young/Daly formula that was computed for each application in
isolation is no longer optimal due to these interferences. We will
come back to this question in Section 4.2.
2.5 Loosely-Coupled Applications
The Young/Daly formula applies to a parallel application where all
processors progress and cooperate continuously, e.g., by exchanging messages: the application cannot continue its execution when
IC3 2022, August 4-6, 2022, Noida, IndiaAnne Benoit, Yishu Du, Thomas Herault, Loris Marchal, Guillaume Pallez, Lucas Perotin, Yves Robert, Hongyang Sun, and Frédéric Vivien
one processor is struck by a failure; it has to wait until a spare
is up and running. In other words, the application is assumed to
be tightly coupled and behaves as if it were executed on a single
(very powerful) processor. Recall that we already made such an
analogy for failures: in fact, the parallel application can be viewed
as a sequential one, executing on a single processor, very fast but
very unreliable too.
What if the application is not tightly-coupled? If the application
includes several tasks that can execute concurrently and independently on different subsets of resources, how frequently should
each task be checkpointed? We use the word task here, but not
in the traditional meaning where tasks are atomic and can only
be checkpointed at the end of their execution (see Section 3 for
such a framework). On the contrary, we assume that each task is
preemptible and can be checkpointed at any time step. It is then
natural to checkpoint each task using the Young/Daly period. But is
this a good strategy, given that many tasks execute in parallel, and
that the failure of one task will slow down the whole application?
Consider the simple example of a fork-join application that consists of 302 tasks: an entry task, 300 identical parallel tasks, and an
exit task. Each parallel task runs on 𝑝 = 30 processors for𝑇base = 10
hours, and is checkpointed in 𝐶 = 6 minutes. The platform has at
least 9, 000 processors so that the 300 parallel tasks can indeed execute concurrently. Such applications are typical of HPC applications
that explore a wide range of parameters or launch subproblems in
parallel. Assume a short downtime 𝐷 = 1 minute, and recovery
time 𝑅 = 𝐶. Finally, assume that each task has 0.5% chances to fail
during execution; this setting corresponds to an individual MTBF
𝜇ind such that 1 − 𝑒
−
𝑝𝑇base
𝜇ind = 0.005, i.e., 𝜇ind = 59, 850 hours (or
6.8 years). This is in accordance with MTBFs typically observed
on large-scale platforms, which range from a few years to a few
dozens of years [18].
In the following paragraphs, we refer to [11] for the details of
computing the expectations of execution times. For each task, the
Young/Daly period is𝑊YD =
√︃
2
𝜇ind
𝑝
𝐶 ≈ 20 hours, and the expected
execution time of a single task E(𝑇1-task) is minimized when only
a single checkpoint is taken at the end of the execution. Recall
that we always take a checkpoint at the end of the execution for
simplification, thus the optimal solution for each task is to take no
additional checkpoint. Then, one can derive that E(𝑇1-task) ≈ 10.4.
However, with 300 tasks executing concurrently, one can compute that the expectation of the total time required to complete all
tasks is E(𝑇all-tasks) > 14. The key point here is that the expectation
E(𝑇all-tasks) of the total time required to complete all tasks is far
larger than the maximum of the expectations (which in the example
all have the same value E(𝑇1-task)).
Because the exit task cannot start before the last parallel task is
completed, the expectation of the total execution time of the forkjoin application is E(𝑇total) = E(𝑇entry) + E(𝑇all-tasks) + E(𝑇exit),
where E(𝑇entry) and E(𝑇exit) are the expected duration of the entry
and exit tasks. Now, when adding four intermediate checkpoints
to each task, we obtain E(𝑇all-tasks) < 12.75. The tasks are then
slightly longer (10.5 hours without failure), but the impact of a
failure is dramatically reduced if a checkpoint is taken every 2
hours. By diminishing E(𝑇all-tasks), we save 75 minutes (and in fact
much more than that, because the lower and upper bounds for
E(𝑇all-tasks) are loosely computed).
This little example shows that for loosely-coupled applications
with a high degree of parallelism, checkpointing each task à la
Young/Daly is not good enough! See [11] for a comprehensive
analysis and evaluation.
3 TASK GRAPHS
In this section, we deal with non-preemptible, task-based applications. The application is structured as a task graph, or workflow.
Each task is atomic and checkpointing is only possible right after
the completion of a task. The task graph summarizes the dependencies between the tasks. The problem is then to determine which
tasks should be checkpointed. It turns out that optimal, or even
efficient, checkpoint strategies are much more difficult to derive
than for preemptible applications.
3.1 Baseline
In task-based systems, checkpoint and rollback-recovery have been
considered, but the granularity of the task system has motivated a
different approach. Since each task represents an atomic application
in itself, the inputs of tasks (that are usually the outputs of other
tasks) are checkpointed to enable the re-execution of failed tasks.
The de-facto standard approach for task systems is the checkpoint
every task approach. This approach is inspired by the work done
in cloud workflow systems, as is typically done in [66] for a recent
example. See [5, 24, 39, 41, 49] for a comprehensive survey of techniques. The outputs of all tasks, which will serve as inputs to other
tasks later in the execution, are saved on stable storage as soon
as each task completes. The stable storage is typically located in a
data center whose disks are accessed by the virtual machines (VMs)
that support the execution of the tasks. This approach guarantees
that recovering from a failure only requires the re-execution of the
task(s) that were executing when the failure stroke; no rollback to
previous tasks is needed since their outputs have been checkpointed
previously and can be retrieved from the disks.
Of course, checkpointing (the output of) every task may induce
a huge overhead, in particular when there are many small tasks
and limited I/O bandwidth to stable storage. We outline below a
few cases where the optimal solution is known, before coming back
to the general case of a workflow whose task graph is arbitrary.
3.2 Linear Chains
The simplest case is when the task graph of the workflow is a
linear chain of (parallel) tasks 𝑇1,𝑇2, . . . ,𝑇𝑛. There is a dependence
from 𝑇𝑖 to 𝑇𝑖+1 for 1 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ 𝑛 − 1. The optimal solution consists in
determining which tasks should be checkpointed.
The execution time of 𝑇𝑖is 𝑤𝑖, its size is 𝑞𝑖 processors, its checkpoint time 𝐶𝑖
, and its recovery time is 𝑅𝑖. Assuming that failures
obey an Exponential distribution Exp(
1
𝜇ind
), where 𝜇ind is the MTBF
of each individual processor, the expected execution time E(𝑇𝑖) to
execute 𝑇𝑖 and to checkpoint it at the end of the execution is wellknown; we have:
E(𝑇𝑖) =

𝑞𝑖
𝜇ind
+ 𝐷

𝑒
𝑞𝑖
𝜇ind
𝑅𝑖

𝑒
−
𝑞𝑖
𝜇ind
(𝑤𝑖+𝐶𝑖 )
− 1

Checkpointing à la Young/Daly IC3 2022, August 4-6, 2022, Noida, India
where 𝐷 is the downtime (see [12, 34]). The expression for E(𝑇𝑖)
can be extended for a block of consecutive tasks followed by a
checkpoint (simply replace 𝑤𝑖 by the execution time of the block).
This gives the baseline for a dynamic programming algorithm where
one tries to place the first checkpoint at the end of task 𝑇𝑘for
1 ≤ 𝑘 ≤ 𝑛 and computes recursively the optimal solution for
the remaining sub-chain 𝑇𝑘+1,𝑇𝑘+2, . . . ,𝑇𝑛. This is the approach
followed by Toueg and Babaoglu [63].
3.3 Iterative Applications
The next problem after a linear chain is that of a pipelined linear
workflow: we consider now a workflow made of a large number
of iterations, each iteration being the same linear chain of parallel
tasks. A typical example is an application consisting of an outer
loop “While convergence is not met, do”, and where the loop
body includes a sequence of large parallel operations. As in Section 3.2, the objective is to find which task outputs should be saved
on stable storage to minimize the expected duration of the whole
computation. However, if the workflow consists of, say, ten thousand iterations, each with twenty tasks, one does not want to apply
the dynamic programming algorithm of Toueg and Babaoglu [63]
to a chain of two hundred thousand tasks!
A natural heuristic is to use the Young/Daly formula and checkpoint at the end of the current task as soon as the total work executed since the last checkpoint exceeds the quantity √︁
2𝜇𝐶. Unfortunately, even if all tasks may well enroll the same number of
processors 𝑞 and, hence, have the same MTBF 𝜇 =
𝜇ind
𝑞
, they are not
likely to have the same checkpoint duration𝐶. One can approximate
𝐶 by the minimum, maximum, or average values of the checkpoint
duration of all tasks. This is the heuristic proposed in [26], and its
performance is shown satisfactory for a wide range of application
scenarios.
As a side note, when the number of iterations is infinite (or very
large in practice), it is shown in [26] that there exists an optimal
checkpointing strategy that is periodic. It consists of a pattern of
task outputs to checkpoint, where this pattern spans over a set of
iterations of bounded size. This pattern is repeated over and over
throughout the execution. [26] also provides a dynamic programming algorithm, which is polynomial in the number of operations
included in the outer loop to compute the optimal periodic checkpoint pattern. The complexity of the algorithm does not depend on
the number of iterations of the outer loop. This pattern may well
checkpoint many different tasks, across many different iterations.
For a workflow with a fixed number of iterations, this periodic
strategy is appealing. However, the cost of computing the optimal
pattern may be high, and the Young/Daly extension described above
may be preferred in some frameworks.
3.4 General Workflows
Another special case is that of a workflow whose dependence graph
is arbitrary but whose tasks are parallel tasks that each executes on
the whole platform. In other words, the tasks have to be serialized.
The problem of ordering the tasks and placing checkpoints is proven
NP-complete for simple join graphs in [2], which also introduces
several heuristics.
For general workflows, the news is not good either. Consider
the problem of scheduling an arbitrary workflow. As mentioned
in Section 3.1, the common strategy used in practice is checkpoint
everything, or CkptAll: all output data of each task is saved onto
stable storage. While this strategy leads to fast restarts in case of
failures, its downside is that it maximizes checkpointing overhead.
At the other end of the spectrum would be a checkpoint nothing
strategy, or CkptNone, by which all output data is kept in memory
(up to memory capacity constraints) and no task is checkpointed.
This corresponds to “in-situ” workflow executions, which have
been proposed to reduce I/O overhead [68]. The downside is that,
in case of a failure, a large number of tasks may have to be reexecuted, leading to slow restarts. The objective of an efficient
checkpoint strategy is to achieve a desirable trade-off between
these two extremes. But the complexity of this problem is steep.
The fundamental difficulty lies in the evaluation of a solution.
A solution consists of an ordered list of tasks to execute for each
processor, and for each task whether or not to save its output
data to stable storage after its execution. In a failure-free execution, the total execution time, or makespan, of a solution is simply
the longest path in the DAG, accounting for serialized task executions at each processor. With failures, the makespan becomes a
random variable because task execution times are probabilistic, due
to failures causing task re-executions. Consider a first simple case
with the CkptAll strategy and a solution in which each task is assigned to a different processor. Computing the expected makespan
amounts to computing the expected longest path in the schedule.
Unfortunately, computing the expected length of the longest path
in a DAG with probabilistic task durations is a known difficult
problem [30, 48]. Even in the simplified case when task durations
are random variables that can take only two discrete values, the
problem is #P-complete [30].1
Now, at the other extreme, consider a second simple example
with the CkptNone strategy and a solution in which each task is
assigned to a different processor. Even if each task has the unitary
cost and can fail only once, computing the expected makespan is
a #P-complete problem again [31]. These two examples show all
the difficulty of the problem, even when an ordered list of tasks to
execute is already assigned to each processor. Several heuristics to
tackle the general problem are proposed in [32].
4 DEALING WITH UNCERTAINTY
This section briefly addresses two scenarios where it is impossible
to apply the Young/Daly formula directly, even though the target
application is preemptible and tightly coupled as in Section 2. Basically, in the 𝑊YD =
√︁
2𝜇𝐶 formula, this is when either 𝜇 or 𝐶 is
unknown!
4.1 Unknown MTBF
When the MBTF 𝜇ind of an individual processor is unknown, the
MTBF 𝜇 =
𝜇ind
𝑝
of the application is unknown too. There is no
other solution than to learn the value of 𝜇 by trial and error. The
initial guess for 𝜇 is arbitrary, say from a few hours to several
1Recall that #P is the class of counting problems that correspond to NP decision
problems [14, 50, 64], and that #P-complete problems are at least as hard as NPcomplete problems.
IC3 2022, August 4-6, 2022, Noida, IndiaAnne Benoit, Yishu Du, Thomas Herault, Loris Marchal, Guillaume Pallez, Lucas Perotin, Yves Robert, Hongyang Sun, and Frédéric Vivien
weeks depending upon the size of the application. Compute 𝑊YD
accordingly and schedule the first checkpoint. If a failure strikes
before this checkpoint, decrease the current estimate of 𝜇. If no
failure strikes before this checkpoint, keep the current value for 𝜇
and proceed for a few periods of the same length. if there is still
no failure at this point, it should be safe to increase the estimate of
𝜇. The rates for decreasing/increasing the current estimate could
follow some geometric progression, e.g., the next estimate is either
half or twice the current one.
An interesting heuristic is proposed in [56]. The checkpoint period is dynamically adjusted so that the aggregate checkpointing
cost always equals the expected rework cost after failure recovery.
The intuition follows the discussion in Section 2.2: in the optimal solution, both sources of waste (checkpoint and re-execution) should
be balanced.
4.2 Unknown Checkpoint Time (Due to
Contention)
This section deals with the scenario where checkpoint cost 𝐶 is
unknown. In fact, this corresponds to a scenario where several
applications are executing concurrently on the platform (recall
space-sharing from Section 2.4). Each application has precise knowledge of the volume of data to be saved but the I/O bandwidth to
stable storage that is granted is subject to variations over time. The
main reason is contention: consider the simple case where two
applications of the same size (number of processors) checkpoint
simultaneously a file of the same size (volume). Each application
will be assigned half the I/O bandwidth to checkpoint, therefore the
commits will take twice as expected. In other words, the checkpoint
time of each application is doubled, and the Young/Daly period
√︁
2𝜇𝐶 should have been increased by a factor √2; the checkpoint
strategy is no longer optimal, and efficiency will decrease.
Several heuristics are described in [35] for this contention problem. Each application attempts to use its Young/Daly period. The
I/O token is given to only one application at every time step, and
I/O operations cannot be interrupted once started. If several applications post concurrent requests to checkpoint, one will be selected
and the other ones will continue their execution. The selection is
based upon several criteria, including the time already spent waiting for I/O and the risk incurred by all the applications (increased
waste) that have not been selected. See [35] for details.
5 SILENT ERRORS
In this section, we consider another type of error: while all previous
sections addressed fail-stop errors, we now deal with silent errors,
first in isolation and then in combination with fail-stop errors. It
turns out that the Young/Daly formula can be extended to deal with
both types of errors.
5.1 Background
We start with some background on silent errors, a.k.a. silent data
corruptions (SDCs). While fail-stop errors lead to fatal interruptions (such as a crash) and cause the loss of the entire memory of
the processor, silent errors only impact a given process and lead
to incorrect results. But a silent error strikes undetected and the
processor can continue its execution; sometimes the silent error
Figure 2: Fails-stop errors versus silent errors.
can be detected and corrected, and some other times it degenerates
into a fatal fail-stop error.
Silent errors may be caused, for instance, by soft errors in the
L1 cache, arithmetic errors in the ALU (Arithmetic and Logic Unit),
or bit flips due to cosmic radiation [44, 47, 70, 71]. Many silent
errors caused by one or multiple bits that spontaneously flip to the
opposite state are caught by hardware mechanisms such as error
correcting codes (ECCs) that have been implemented to protect
memory. But in reality, some bit flips still manage to pass undetected [59]. Moreover, processor caches are not protected by ECC
in general, but by weaker mechanisms, like simple parity, exposing
a higher risk of undetectable error in case of multiple simultaneous
bit flips. Buses also often are a weak link in the protecting chain,
making all data transfers at higher risk. In addition, the constant
need to reduce component size and voltage increases the likelihood of silent errors. In a nutshell, silent errors have become a
major threat due to the increase in problem size [58]: the larger the
problem, the more memory to be used to store the data, the more
frequent the errors, and the higher the probability of overriding
ECC protection, generating multiple errors.
A major problem with silent errors is detection latency: contrarily
to a fail-stop error whose detection is immediate, a silent error is
identified only when the corrupted data is activated and/or leads to
an unusual application behavior. On the contrary, checkpoint and
rollback recovery assumes instantaneous error detection, and this
raises a new difficulty: if the error stroke before the last checkpoint,
and is detected after that checkpoint, then the checkpoint is corrupted and cannot be used to restore the application. To solve this
problem, one may envision keeping several checkpoints in memory
and restoring the application from the last valid checkpoint, thereby
rolling back to the last correct state of the application [42]. But even
if it was at all possible to store many checkpoints (which is very
demanding in memory), one would not know how to identify the
last valid one. Some verification mechanism, or detector, must be
enforced.
Considerable efforts have been directed at designing such verification mechanisms to reveal silent errors, because error detection
is usually very costly. Hardware mechanisms, such as ECC memory, can detect and even correct a fraction of errors, but in practice, they are complemented with software techniques. The only
general-purpose method is to replicate the execution of the target
computational kernel on two sets of processors and to compare
the results of both executions. If they do not coincide, an error has
been detected, and the application must be executed a third time. To
Checkpointing à la Young/Daly IC3 2022, August 4-6, 2022, Noida, India
avoid a-posteriori re-execution, triplication can be enforced, which
allows for error correction in addition to error detection, using a
simple majority vote. However, triplication (originally known as
triple modular redundancy and voting [43]) is even more costly than
replication, which already requires half the resources to execute
redundant operations.
Application-specific information can be very useful to enable
ad-hoc solutions, which dramatically decreases the cost of detection. Many techniques have been advocated. They include memory
scrubbing [38] and ABFT techniques [15, 37, 55], such as coding for
the sparse-matrix vector multiplication kernel [55], and coupling a
higher-order with a lower-order scheme for PDEs [13]. These methods can only detect an error but do not correct it. Self-stabilizing
corrections after error detection in the conjugate gradient method
are investigated in [51]. Fault-tolerant iterative solvers for sparse
linear algebra are introduced in [17, 20, 36], using extra checks
such as re-computing inner products of vectors that should be
orthogonal, or even re-computing the residual.
In summary, application-specific detectors are very appealing
due to their low cost as compared to replication, but they suffer
from some limitations. Most application-specific detectors can only
detect errors, not correct them. Next, they are used to detect errors
of a certain type, while many types can strike. For instance, with
iterative methods, orthogonality tests will detect arithmetic errors
but cannot do anything if we start with corrupted data in memory.
Worse, even for a given type of error, the detector will not detect
all the errors of that type, but only a fraction of them (one says
that the detector recall is strictly smaller than one). Finally, ABFT
is one of the few methods that enables error correction in addition
to detection, but it is currently limited to correcting a single error
due to the numerical instability of state-of-the-art methods.
5.2 Optimal Period for Silent Errors
We study a generic solution that is agnostic of the nature of the
verification mechanism (replication, checksum, error correcting
code, coherence tests, etc.). We assume that we can rely on a fully
general-purpose detector, of cost𝑉 . The idea is to perform a verification just before taking each checkpoint. If the verification succeeds,
then one can safely store the checkpoint. If the verification fails, it
means that a silent error has struck since the last checkpoint, which
was duly verified, and one can safely recover from that checkpoint
to resume the execution of the application.
See Figure 2 for an illustration and comparison with fail-stop
errors. If a silent error strikes, it is always detected only at the end of
the period, when the verification reveals the error; on the contrary,
a fail-stop error strikes in the middle of the period on average and
is detected immediately. Note that there is no downtime for silent
errors because the processor can continue its execution after a silent
error and need not be replaced. For simplification, we have used
𝐷 = 0 in the second row of Figure 2 (with fail-stop error), but recall
there is a downtime after a fail-stop error in the general case.
Just as for fail-stop errors, we introduce the MTBE of individual
nodes as 𝜇
silent
ind . Here the MTBE is the Mean Time Between Errors,
the counterpart for silent errors of the MBTF for fail-stop errors.
The MTBE of an application with 𝑝 processors will be 𝜇
silent =
𝜇
silent
ind
𝑝
:
because the frequency of silent errors is proportional to the number
Figure 3: Introducing two intermediate verifications in the
period.
of arithmetic operations executed, and/or to the volume of the
memory footprint of the application; the MTBE scales linearly with
the size of the application, just as the MTBF does.
Now consider a parallel application of MTBE 𝜇
silent. At first sight,
one could think that the optimal Young/Daly period for silent errors
will be 𝑊YD =
√︃
2𝜇
silent(𝑉 + 𝐶), because we have replaced each
checkpoint of cost𝐶 by a verified checkpoint of cost𝑉 +𝐶. However,
because a silent error is always detected only at the end of the period,
when the verification reveals the error, the formula will be different.
With the notations of Section 2.2, the two sources of waste become
𝑆1 =
𝑉 +𝐶
𝑊 +𝑉 +𝐶
and 𝑆2 =
1
𝜇
silent (𝑅+𝑊 +𝑉 ). Altogether, both sources of
waste approximately add up, so we have to find 𝑊 that minimizes
𝑆1 + 𝑆2. Simplifying as before, we obtain 𝑆1 + 𝑆2 ≈
𝑉 +𝐶
𝑊 +
𝑊
𝜇
silent ,
which is minimized for
𝑊YD =
√︃
𝜇
silent(𝑉 + 𝐶) (2)
Equation (2) is the Young/Daly formula for silent errors!
5.3 Extensions
A first natural extension is to deal with both fail-stop and silent
errors. Indeed, both sources of errors are likely to strike simultaneously when executing a parallel application. In that case, the
failure-free waste 𝑆1 =
𝑉 +𝐶
𝑊 +𝑉 +𝐶
remains unchanged but the failureinduced waste should be updated to account for both error types:
𝑆2 =
1
𝜇
fail 
𝐷 + 𝑅 +
1
2
(𝑊 + 𝑉 + 𝐶)

+
1
𝜇
silent (𝑅 +𝑊 + 𝑉 )
Here for clarity, we have used 𝜇
fail instead of simply 𝜇 for the MTBF
of the application. Simplifying again, we obtain that the total waste
is minimized for
𝑊YD =
vt 1
1
2𝜇
fail +
1
𝜇
silent
(𝑉 + 𝐶) (3)
Equation (3) is the Young/Daly formula for fail-stop and silent errors combined! We check that Equation (3) reduces to Equation (1)
when 𝜇
silent = ∞ and 𝑉 = 0 (only fail-stop errors) and to Equation (2) when 𝜇
fail = ∞ (only silent errors). The general case uses
the harmonic mean of 𝜇
fail and 𝜇silent weighted by the average
proportion of re-execution time in a period when struck by an error.
The second extension applies when application-specific information enables to decrease the cost of a verification well below the cost
of a checkpoint, i.e., when 𝑉 ≪ 𝐶. In that case, it is useful to insert
some intermediate verifications within the period to detect silent
IC3 2022, August 4-6, 2022, Noida, IndiaAnne Benoit, Yishu Du, Thomas Herault, Loris Marchal, Guillaume Pallez, Lucas Perotin, Yves Robert, Hongyang Sun, and Frédéric Vivien
errors early on. Assume that we deal with silent errors only and see
Figure 3 for an example of a period with 2 intermediate verifications
(and a third one at the end of the period to verify the checkpoint).
The failure-free waste 𝑆1 is increased to 𝑆1 =
3𝑉 +𝐶
𝑊 +3𝑉 +𝐶
≈
3𝑉 +𝐶
𝑊 .
However, the failure-induced waste is reduced to
𝑆2 =
1
𝜇
silent 
1
3
(𝑅 +
𝑊
3
+ 𝑉 ) + 1
3
(𝑅 +
2𝑊
3
+ 2𝑉 ) + 1
3
(𝑅 +𝑊 + 3𝑉 )

≈
1
𝜇
silent
(1+2+3)𝑊
9
=
2𝑊
3𝜇
silent
To see this, with equal probability 1
3
, the silent error will strike
either third of the pattern, and re-execution will cost either 𝑊
3
(first
third), or 2𝑊
3
(second third), or 𝑊 (last third). This leads to 𝑆1 + 𝑆2
minimized for 𝑊 =
√︃
3
2
𝜇
silent(3𝑉 + 𝐶) and we get (𝑆1 + 𝑆2)min =
2
√︂
2(3𝑉 +𝐶)
3𝜇
silent for that value. In comparison, without intermediate
verification, we had (𝑆1 + 𝑆2)min = 2
√︃
𝑉 +𝐶
𝜇
silent . We check that adding
two intermediate verifications is better than none as long as 𝑉 ≤
𝐶
3
. This is very likely to be the case with an application-specific
detector.
We refer to [10] for the analysis of more general patterns. Also,
we have assumed a perfect verification mechanism, while all application detectors have a limited recall (ratio of missed errors, or
false negatives) and a limited precision (ratio of detected errors that
are in fact not errors, or false positives). One can have an arsenal
of several detectors of different recall, precision, and cost that can
be used; see [6] for choosing the best approach.
6 CONCLUSION
This survey has dealt with checkpointing policies based upon the
Young/Daly period and has assessed its usefulness and robustness
together with its limitations. We discuss some extensions and open
problems in this conclusion.
For preemptible applications (Section 2), we have focused on
coordinated checkpointing onto stable storage, but most of the
results hold for other methods that reduce checkpoint overhead,
such as in-memory checkpointing [25, 46, 69], two-level checkpointing [23, 57] and multi-level checkpointing [8, 9, 22, 45].
For task-based applications, one could envision an extension of
coordinated checkpointing designed for such systems. Using periodic coordinated checkpointing to decide which tasks to checkpoint
in a distributed task system consists of finding a period between
two checkpoint waves, and coordinating all the processes of the
application to checkpoint their state. Applying this heuristic to a
task-based system does not ensure optimal performance, because
the amount of data to checkpoint depends on the number and input of the ready tasks and varies over time, which is outside the
assumptions of the periodic checkpointing approach. However, by
continuously adapting the period to the amount of work executed
(either maximal or averaged across all processors), this strategy
may provide an efficient solution in scenarios where tasks are small
and where failures are rare.
For both application models (preemptible and task-based), we
have assumed failure independence. Indeed, the standard model
assumes IID failure inter-arrival times, or IATs, on each node, with
a common distribution D. As for temporal dependence, it has been
observed many times that when a failure occurs, it may trigger other
failures that will strike different system components [7, 33, 62]. As
an example, a failing cooling system may cause a series of successive crashes of different nodes. Also, an outstanding error in the
file system will likely be followed by several others [40, 54]. As for
spatial dependence, it is clear that the overheating of some node
in a cabinet is quite likely to be followed by the overheating of
neighbor nodes (which comes atop of a temporal dependence as
well!). Bautista-Gomez et al. [7] have studied nine systems, and
they report periods of high failure density in all of them. They
call these periods cascade failures. This observation has led them
to revisit the temporal failure independence assumption, and to
design bi-periodic checkpointing algorithms that use different periods in normal (failure-free) and degraded (with failure cascades)
modes. [62] introduces a dynamic strategy called lazy checkpointing to adjust to changes in the failure rate. Another approach has
been proposed in [4], using quantiles of consecutive IAT pairs. It
is an open problem to derive an efficient checkpoint strategy that
can account for temporal or spatial dependence between failures.
For example, spatial dependence calls for a variant of in-memory
checkpointing where the buddy of a processor (acting replica of
a checkpoint) is chosen far away from that processor, while it is
better to select a physical neighbor to optimize communication
overhead if failures are truly independent. Complicated trade-offs
must be achieved.
Finally, for silent errors, the first open problem remains which
detector to use and when. Some parts of the application are critical (such as its execution code) and must be protected at all costs
while some other parts (like non-critical data) may be loosely and
infrequently verified by cheap mechanisms; we speak of selective
reliability in such a framework. More generally, trustworthy computing is the problem of guaranteeing, at least with some high
probability, that the final results of a parallel application are correct.
The higher the flop count and the larger the data footprint, the
more challenging to achieve this goal!
REFERENCES
[1] Sarala Arunagiri, John T. Daly, and Patricia J. Teller. 2010. Modeling and Analysis
of Checkpoint I/O Operations. In Analytical and Stochastic Modeling Techniques
and Applications: 17th International Conference. Springer, 387–399.
[2] Guillaume Aupy, Anne Benoit, Henri Casanova, and Yves Robert. 2016. Scheduling computational workflows on failure-prone platforms. Int. J. of Networking
and Computing 6, 1 (2016), 2–26.
[3] Guillaume Aupy, Anne Benoit, Thomas Hérault, and Yves Robert. 2013. Optimal
checkpointing period: time vs. energy. In PMBS 2013, the 4th Int. Workshop on Performance Modeling, Benchmarking and Simulation of High Performance Computer
Systems. LNCS Springer Verlag.
[4] Guillaume Aupy, Yves Robert, and Frédéric Vivien. 2017. Assuming failure
independence: are we right to be wrong?. In FTS’2017.
[5] Anju Bala and Inderveer Chana. 2012. Fault tolerance-challenges, techniques and
implementation in cloud computing. International Journal of Computer Science
Issues (IJCSI) 9, 1 (2012), 288.
[6] Leonardo Bautista-Gomez, Anne Benoit, Aurélien Cavelan, Saurabh Raina, Yves
Robert, and Hongyang Sun. 2016. Coping with recall and precision of soft error
detectors. J. Parallel and Distributed Computing 98 (2016), 8–24.
[7] L. Bautista-Gomez, A. Gainaru, S. Perarnau, D. Tiwari, S. Gupta, C. Engelmann, F.
Cappello, and M. Snir. 2016. Reducing Waste in Extreme Scale Systems through
Introspective Analysis. In IPDPS. IEEE, 212–221.
[8] Leonardo Bautista-Gomez, Seiji Tsuboi, Dimitri Komatitsch, Franck Cappello,
Naoya Maruyama, and Satoshi Matsuoka. 2011. FTI: High Performance Fault
Tolerance Interface for Hybrid Systems. In Proc. SC’11.
[9] Anne Benoit, Aurélien Cavelan, Valentin Le Fèvre, Yves Robert, and Hongyang
Sun. 2017. Towards optimal multi-level checkpointing. IEEE Trans. Computers
66, 7 (2017), 1212–1226.
Checkpointing à la Young/Daly IC3 2022, August 4-6, 2022, Noida, India
[10] Anne Benoit, Aurélien Cavelan, Yves Robert, and Hongyang Sun. 2016. Assessing
general-purpose algorithms to cope with fail-stop and silent errors. ACM Trans.
Parallel Computing 3, 2 (2016).
[11] Anne Benoit, Lucas Perotin, Yves Robert, and Hongyang Sun. 2021. Checkpointing
Workflows à la Young/Daly Is Not Good Enough. Research report RR-9413. INRIA.
Available at https://hal.inria.fr/hal-03264047/.
[12] Anne Benoit, Lucas Perotin, Yves Robert, and Frédéric Vivien. 2022. Checkpointing
strategies to protect parallel jobs from non-memoryless fail-stop errors. Research
report RR-9465. INRIA. Available at https://hal.inria.fr/hal-03610883.
[13] Austin R. Benson, Sven Schmit, and Robert Schreiber. 2014. Silent error detection in numerical time-stepping schemes. Int. J. High Performance Computing
Applications (2014).
[14] Hans L. Bodlaender and Thomas Wolle. 2004. A Note on the Complexity of
Network Reliability Problems. IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory 47 (2004), 1971–1988.
[15] George Bosilca, Rémi Delmas, Jack Dongarra, and Julien Langou. 2009. Algorithmbased fault tolerance applied to high performance computing. J. Parallel Distrib.
Comput. 69, 4 (2009), 410–416.
[16] Marin Bougeret, Henri Casanova, Mikael Rabie, Yves Robert, and Frédéric Vivien.
2011. Checkpointing strategies for parallel jobs. In Proc. of SC’11.
[17] Greg Bronevetsky and Bronis de Supinski. 2008. Soft error vulnerability of
iterative linear algebra methods. In ICS. ACM.
[18] Franck Cappello, Al Geist, William Gropp, Sanjay Kale, Bill Kramer, and Marc
Snir. 2014. Toward Exascale Resilience: 2014 update. Supercomputing frontiers
and innovations 1, 1 (2014).
[19] K. M. Chandy and L. Lamport. 1985. Distributed Snapshots: Determining Global
States of Distributed Systems. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems 3, 1 (1985),
63–75.
[20] Zizhong Chen. 2013. Online-ABFT: An online algorithm based fault tolerance
scheme for soft error detection in iterative methods. In Proc. PPoPP. 167–176.
[21] J. T. Daly. 2006. A higher order estimate of the optimum checkpoint interval for
restart dumps. FGCS 22, 3 (2006), 303–312.
[22] Sheng Di, Mohamed Slim Bouguerra, Leonardo Bautista-Gomez, and Franck
Cappello. 2014. Optimization of multi-level checkpoint model for large scale
HPC applications. In IPDPS. IEEE.
[23] Sheng Di, Yves Robert, Frederic Vivien, and Franck Cappello. 2016. Toward an
Optimal Online Checkpoint Solution under a Two-Level HPC Checkpoint Model.
IEEE Trans. Parallel & Distributed Systems (2016).
[24] Yongsheng Ding, Guangshun Yao, and Kuangrong Hao. 2017. Fault-tolerant
elastic scheduling algorithm for workflow in Cloud systems. Information Sciences
393 (2017), 47–65.
[25] Jack Dongarra, Thomas Hérault, and Yves Robert. 2014. Performance and reliability trade-offs for the double checkpointing algorithm. Int. J. of Networking
and Computing 4, 1 (2014), 23–41.
[26] Yishu Du, Guillaume Pallez, Loris Marchal, and Yves Robert. 2022. Optimal
checkpointing strategies for iterative applications. IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed
Systems 33, 3 (2022), 507–522.
[27] Nosayba El-Sayed and Bianca Schroeder. 2014. To checkpoint or not to checkpoint: Understanding energy-performance-I/O tradeoffs in HPC checkpointing.
In CLUSTER. 93–102.
[28] K. Ferreira, J. Stearley, J. H. III Laros, R. Oldfield, K. Pedretti, R. Brightwell, R.
Riesen, P. G. Bridges, and D. Arnold. 2011. Evaluating the Viability of Process
Replication Reliability for Exascale Systems. In SC’11. ACM.
[29] Erol Gelenbe, Pawel Boryszko, Miltiadis Siavvas, and Joanna Domanska. 2020.
Optimum Checkpoints for Time and Energy. In 28th MASCOTS. IEEE, 1–8.
[30] Jane N. Hagstrom. 1988. Computational complexity of PERT problems. Networks
18, 2 (1988), 139–147.
[31] Li Han, Louis-Claude Canon, Henri Casanova, Yves Robert, and Frédéric Vivien.
2018. Checkpointing workflows for fail-stop errors. IEEE Trans. Computers 67, 8
(2018), 1105–1120.
[32] Li Han, Valentin Le Fèvre, Louis-Claude Canon, Yves Robert, and Frédéric Vivien.
2018. A Generic Approach to Scheduling and Checkpointing Workflows. In
ICPP’2018, the 47th Int. Conf. on Parallel Processing.
[33] Eric Heien, Derrick Kondo, Ana Gainaru, Dan LaPine, Bill Kramer, and Franck
Cappello. 2011. Modeling and tolerating heterogeneous failures in large parallel
systems. In Proc. SC’11.
[34] Thomas Herault and Yves Robert (Eds.). 2015. Fault-Tolerance Techniques for
High-Performance Computing. Springer Verlag.
[35] Thomas Herault, Yves Robert, Aurelien Bouteiller, Dorian Arnold, Kurt B. Ferreira,
George Bosilca, and Jack Dongarra. 2019. Checkpointing Strategies for Shared
High-Performance Computing Platforms. International Journal of Networking
and Computing 9, 1 (2019), 28–52.
[36] M.A. Heroux and M Hoemmen. 2011. Fault-tolerant iterative methods via selective
reliability. Research report SAND2011-3915 C. Sandia Nat. Lab.
[37] Kuang-Hua Huang and J. A. Abraham. 1984. Algorithm-Based Fault Tolerance
for Matrix Operations. IEEE Trans. Comput. 33, 6 (1984), 518–528.
[38] Andy A. Hwang, Ioan A. Stefanovici, and Bianca Schroeder. 2012. Cosmic rays
don’t strike twice: understanding the nature of DRAM errors and the implications
for system design. SIGARCH Comput. Archit. News 40, 1 (2012), 111–122.
[39] Gopi Kandaswamy, Anirban Mandal, and Daniel A Reed. 2008. Fault tolerance
and recovery of scientific workflows on computational grids. In 2008 Eighth IEEE
International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid (CCGRID). IEEE,
777–782.
[40] Steven Y. Ko, Imranul Hoque, Brian Cho, and Indranil Gupta. 2010. Making
Cloud Intermediate Data Fault-tolerant. In Proc. 1st ACM Symposium on Cloud
Computing (SoCC ’10). ACM.
[41] Priti Kumari and Parmeet Kaur. 2018. A survey of fault tolerance in cloud
computing. Journal of King Saud University - Computer and Information Sciences
(2018).
[42] Guoming Lu, Ziming Zheng, and Andrew A. Chien. 2013. When is Multi-version
Checkpointing Needed?. In Proc. 3rd Workshop on Fault-tolerance for HPC at
extreme scale (FTXS). 49–56.
[43] R. E. Lyons and W. Vanderkulk. 1962. The use of triple-modular redundancy to
improve computer reliability. IBM J. Res. Dev. 6, 2 (1962), 200–209.
[44] Adam Moody, Greg Bronevetsky, Kathryn Mohror, and Bronis R. de Supinski.
2010. Design, Modeling, and Evaluation of a Scalable Multi-level Checkpointing
System. In SC. ACM.
[45] Adam Moody, Greg Bronevetsky, Kathryn Mohror, and Bronis R. de Supinski.
2010. Design, Modeling, and Evaluation of a Scalable Multi-level Checkpointing
System. In Proc. SC’10.
[46] Xiang Ni, Esteban Meneses, and Laxmikant V. Kalé. 2012. Hiding checkpoint
overhead in HPC applications with a semi-blocking algorithm. In Cluster Computing (CLUSTER), 2012 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE Computer Society,
364–372.
[47] T.J. O’Gorman. 1994. The effect of cosmic rays on the soft error rate of a DRAM
at ground level. IEEE Trans. Electron Devices 41, 4 (1994), 553–557.
[48] Michael L. Pinedo. 2016. Scheduling: Theory, Algorithms, and Systems (5th ed.).
Springer.
[49] Soma Prathiba and S. Sowvarnica. 2017. Survey of failures and fault tolerance in
cloud. In 2017 2nd International Conference on Computing and Communications
Technologies (ICCCT). 169–172.
[50] J. Scott Provan and Michael O. Ball. 1983. The Complexity of Counting Cuts and
of Computing the Probability that a Graph is Connected. SIAM J. Comp. 12, 4
(1983), 777–788.
[51] Piyush Sao and Richard Vuduc. 2013. Self-stabilizing Iterative Solvers. In ScalA
’13.
[52] B. Schroeder and G. A. Gibson. 2006. A large-scale study of failures in highperformance computing systems. In Proc. of DSN. 249–258.
[53] Bianca Schroeder and Garth A Gibson. 2007. Understanding failures in petascale
computers. Journal of Physics: Conference Series 78, 1 (2007).
[54] K. Schroiff, P. Gemsjaeger, and C. Bolik. 2006. Cascading failover of a data
management application for shared disk file systems in loosely coupled node
clusters. https://www.google.com/patents/US6990606 US Patent 6,990,606.
[55] Manu Shantharam, Sowmyalatha Srinivasmurthy, and Padma Raghavan. 2012.
Fault Tolerant Preconditioned Conjugate Gradient for Sparse Linear System
Solution. In ICS. ACM.
[56] P. Sigdel, X. Yuan, and N. Tzeng. 2021. Realizing Best Checkpointing Control in
Computing Systems. IEEE TPDS 32, 2 (2021), 315–329.
[57] L.M. Silva and J.G. Silva. 1998. Using two-level stable storage for efficient checkpointing. IEE Proceedings - Software 145, 6 (1998), 198–202.
[58] M. Snir and et al. 2014. Addressing Failures in Exascale Computing. Int. J. High
Perform. Comput. Appl. 28, 2 (2014), 129–173.
[59] Vilas Sridharan, Nathan DeBardeleben, Sean Blanchard, Kurt B. Ferreira, Jon
Stearley, John Shalf, and Sudhanva Gurumurthi. 2015. Memory Errors in Modern
Systems: The Good, The Bad, and The Ugly. In 20th Int. Conf. on Architectural
Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS). ACM,
297–310.
[60] Omer Subasi, Gokcen Kestor, and Sriram Krishnamoorthy. 2017. Toward a General
Theory of Optimal Checkpoint Placement. In CLUSTER. IEEE, 464–474.
[61] Omer Subasi, Tatiana Martsinkevich, Ferad Zyulkyarov, Osman Unsal, Jesus
Labarta, and Franck Cappello. 2018. Unified fault-tolerance framework for hybrid
task-parallel message-passing applications. IJHPCA 32, 5 (2018), 641–657.
[62] Devesh Tiwari, Saurabh Gupta, and Sudharshan S. Vazhkudai. 2014. Lazy Checkpointing: Exploiting Temporal Locality in Failures to Mitigate Checkpointing
Overheads on Extreme-Scale Systems. In 44th Int. Conf. on Dependable Systems
and Networks. IEEE, 25–36.
[63] Sam Toueg and Özalp Babaoğlu. 1984. On the Optimum Checkpoint Selection
Problem. SIAM J. Comput. 13, 3 (1984).
[64] Leslie G. Valiant. 1979. The Complexity of Enumeration and Reliability Problems.
SIAM J. Comput. 8, 3 (1979), 410–421.
[65] Ole Weidner, Malcolm Atkinson, Adam Barker, and Rosa Filgueira Vicente. 2016.
Rethinking High Performance Computing Platforms: Challenges, Opportunities and Recommendations. In Proc. Data-Intensive Distributed Computing DIDC.
ACM.
[66] Xiaolong Xu, Ruichao Mo, Fei Dai, Wenmin Lin, Shaohua Wan, and Wanchun
Dou. 2019. Dynamic resource provisioning with fault tolerance for data-intensive
meteorological workflows in cloud. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics
IC3 2022, August 4-6, 2022, Noida, IndiaAnne Benoit, Yishu Du, Thomas Herault, Loris Marchal, Guillaume Pallez, Lucas Perotin, Yves Robert, Hongyang Sun, and Frédéric Vivien
16, 9 (2019), 6172–6181.
[67] John W. Young. 1974. A first order approximation to the optimum checkpoint
interval. Comm. of the ACM 17, 9 (1974), 530–531.
[68] Fan Zhang, Ciprian Docan, Manish Parashar, Scott Klasky, Norbert Podhorszki,
and Hasan Abbasi. 2012. Enabling In-situ Execution of Coupled Scientific Workflow on Multi-core Platform. In Proc. 26th IEEE Int. Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium. 1352–1363.
[69] Gengbin Zheng, Lixia Shi, and L. V. Kale. 2004. FTC-Charm++: an in-memory
checkpoint-based fault tolerant runtime for Charm++ and MPI. In Cluster Computing, 2004 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE Computer Society, 93–103.
[70] J.F. Ziegler, M.E. Nelson, J.D. Shell, R.J. Peterson, C.J. Gelderloos, H.P. Muhlfeld,
and C.J. Montrose. 1998. Cosmic ray soft error rates of 16-Mb DRAM memory
chips. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits 33, 2 (1998), 246–252.
[71] J. F. Ziegler, H. W. Curtis, H. P. Muhlfeld, C. J. Montrose, and B. Chin. 1996. IBM
Experiments in Soft Fails in Computer Electronics. IBM J. Res. Dev. 40, 1 (1996),
3–18.