Comparing, Contrasting, Generalizing, and Integrating Two
Current Designs for Fault-Tolerant MPI
Amin Hassani, Anthony Skjellum
University of Alabama at Birmingham
CH 115, 1300 University Blvd
Birmingham, AL, 35205
{ahassani,tony}@cis.uab.edu
Ron Brightwell
Sandia National Laboratories
PO Box 5800
Albuquerque, NM 87185-1319
rbbrigh@sandia.gov
ABSTRACT
This paper compares and contrasts the respective approaches
and key features of two contemporary proposals for faulttolerant MPI: User-Level Failure Mitigation (UFLM) and
Fault-Aware MPI (FA-MPI). A goal of this paper is to show
how these two proposals can potentially complement each
other and also how they can plausibly leverage each other
through modifications and/or extensions of their semantics
and APIs. In particular, we show how to “weaken” and extend ULFM to help integrate it with FA-MPI, with corollary
benefits of potential other uses of ULFM with other faulttolerant schemes as well. The reducibility of the approaches
to each other is also discussed. This conceptual process helps
identify clearly which components of each approach are minimally required and/or desirable for MPI standardization,
versus layerable on top of a future MPI standard. Requirements posed by each on underlying protocols of MPI implementations are mentioned as these have important middledown implications on system and network design at scale.
Keywords
MPI, Fault-Tolerance, ULFM, FA-MPI
1. INTRODUCTION
Resilience is one of the most significant challenges facing large-scale scientific computing. Machines continue to
grow in scale and core count in order to achieve ever higher
levels of computational performance but without significant
improvements in hardware reliability in most designs. Such
platforms will necessarily be prone to increasing rates of failure. It is unclear at present if existing strategies for tolerating such faults and recovering from failures arising from such
faults will continue to be effective. A recent study [10] on
systems at the Los Alamos National Laboratory concluded
that failure rate in supercomputers was linearly correlated
with number of sockets in the subject systems. However, in
addition to scale, environmental issues such as cosmic rays
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
EUROMPI/ASIA ’14 Kyoto, Japan
Copyright 2014 ACM X-XXXXX-XX-X/XX/XX ...$15.00.
played a role in failure rate. In contrast to the concept of
standard message passing and other portable program constructs used today, applications will need to adapt to diverse
types and rates of faults on different systems, and even to
different scales on the same instance of a system.
MPI [8] was designed to achieve high performance-portability
without regard to fault-tolerance in the application or API
level. The MPI model is well-known to posit a reliable communication layer in which processes are always able to communicate once they become known. Any failure management is considered either or both the responsibility of the
application and/or the underlying MPI library implementation itself transparently to the application. Except for
registration of an error handler per-communicator (vs. perfunction or other granularity of error reporting), resource
exhaustion, and invalid function argument detection, the
MPI programming interface offers no fault-management capability or semantics. For instance, process failure typically
causes either a hang or an abort of the parallel application;
practical workarounds formally violate the MPI standard.
1.1 Relaxing Absolute Consistency
As mentioned above, MPI was not designed with fault tolerance in mind. This decision, while valid 20 years ago, leads
to MPI programmers think in terms of absolute correctness
and consistency when using MPI. Programs rarely check for
any errors at run-time, particularly because such checks only
reduce performance of MPI applications. However “always”
or “absolute” consistency cannot not be assured in unreliable
extreme systems. Programs need to assess the reliability of
such system at run-time and act upon the special situations.
So any fault-tolerant MPI cannot not guaranty 100% consistency because of a high complexity and unreliability of large
systems. Any design decision that promises full reliability
and consistency will eventually lead to high (unacceptable)
overheads.
A simple example involves the consensus problem in asynchronous systems. In order to achieve consistency regarding
the state of the system, reaching agreement (consensus) on
a decision among a set of peers is needed. However, it has
been proven that solving consensus in asynchronous systems
deterministically even with only one process failure is impossible [5] unless the system contains a failure detector [3].
This approach is reasonable for systems that decouple the
failure detector module from the application [3]. Although
reaching scalable and reliable agreement between large number of peers is hard to achieve (particularly if the structure
of communication in the algorithm is tree based), there are
SAND2014-17365C
special cases of process crashes that require an extremely
complicated implementation and high overhead. Notably,
logging the state of consensus and consequently recovering
a process from failure on the same node is undesirable [7].
Nevertheless, none of these consensus algorithms are fault
tolerant to network partitioning failures. In other words, in
such large systems, to achieve maximum scalability, consistency should not be a black-and-white outcome, but rather
a certain level of uncertainty should be allowed for special
cases, with additional effort and overhead accepted where
full agreement can’t be reached.
This discussion motivates that any fault-tolerant MPI for
extreme scale systems should allow some level of inconsistency (at least some of the time), and that the required
amount of agreement should be adjustable by accepting a
concomitant level of application overhead. For instance, an
MPI implementation might guarantee 9X% of full consistency with low fault-free overhead and the remaining time
notify the application of its inability to achieve a consistent
agreement at a certain, probably small, time period; thus,
the application would forced in such events to do a partial
or complete restart from the last checkpoint. Systems can
plausibly be improved over their lifetimes by discovering and
improving the fault modeling. Such steps do not necessarily
improve the theoretical bound on agreement or reliability,
but would improve the practical bound, similar to finding
and removing residual faults (bugs) in software.
1.2 Asynchronous Fault Management
The path to Exascale and the concomitant need for scalable, dependable applications and reusable libraries motivate the use of (and allowable restriction to) non-blocking
communication operations in message passing systems (at
least for the purposes of revealing and focusing an effective
fault tolerant message passing model, rather than coping
with the added/accidental complexities of blocking legacy
semantics under failures). Non-blocking operations have
proven to be the best semantics in MPI for achieving overlap
of computation, communication, and I/O [4]. Non-blocking
semantics are also important aspects for fault-tolerance in
MPI. At the moment of fault, all layers of system become
instantaneously coupled and in a parallel system such faults
can increase the tight coupling already extant between components. As an example, an MPI communication operation
might hang because of a process failure in a remote process.
In this situation, forward progress of the user thread in an
unfaulted process will be impossible because of the coupling
between the user thread and communication thread. However, in non-blocking semantics, a remote failure would not
necessarily halt the user thread (unless MPI_WAIT or a similar
operation is called for completion of an operation).
Any fault-tolerant approach should address the consider
the value of dissociating the user thread from the communication mechanism; this decoupling approach motivates the
design of asynchronous fault tolerance, although the idea
does not imply any type of transparent fault tolerance and
recovery. In other words, fault management can be decided
and programmed by the application, but the progress of detection, isolation, mitigation, and recovery from faults could
be made asynchronous from a set of user threads. This approach allows for the potential of increased scalability of
applications in unreliable environments. Asynchronous approaches has been shown successful in previous work such
as checkpoint-restart [9]. Also, transactions have becoming important with emergence of transactional memories.
While communication libraries provide comparatively more
asynchronous mechanisms, there is also more opportunity to
offload these mechanisms down to hardware for further scalability and performance. Furthermore, such offload needs
support mechanisms such as efficient communication timeout mechanisms or failure detection (to make such mechanisms efficient, and also to help address fault free overhead).
1.3 Trade-offs
MPI designers and application programmers should not
view a fault-tolerant MPI design strict as providing certain
API routines in their code and presuming their application
becomes fault tolerant simply by adding such operations.
Rather, in order to achieve maximum net performance, scalability, and resilience, they should think in terms of tradeoffs between these three parameters. These trade-off can
be based on different criteria such as the length of time of
the running application, data size, the degree and kinds of
coupling between components, asynchronicity of underlying
algorithms and etc. Any fault-tolerant MPI should allow
configuration between these three parameters to help achieve
overall best operation under faulty conditions.
2. CURRENT PROPOSALS
Two current proposals for fault tolerance in MPI are UserLevel Failure Mitigation [1, 2] and Fault-Aware MPI [6, 11].
The former is in the process of MPI standardization while
the latter is a developing research effort being undertaken
by the authors of this paper. In the following subsections
an overview of both proposals is presented, with the goal
of comparing and contrasting these efforts in advance of exploring ways to generalize and integrate them.
2.1 FA-MPI
Fault-Aware MPI [6, 11] introduces a transactional model
of fault tolerance to MPI programming for the first time
in order to address failure detection, isolation, mitigation,
and recovery via application-driven policies. FA-MPI leverages non-blocking communication operations combined with
a set of lightweight transactional TryBlock API extensions
that can be nested to utilize the system and application hierarchy for failure detection and recovery. TryBlocks define
the communication and computation boundary for failure
management and this boundary can be configured to achieve
a trade-off between scalability, performance and resilience.
The goal is to enable applications to run to completion with
higher probability than running on a non-fault-aware MPI.
Scaling up and out and fault-free overhead are key concerns
and can be managed through setting the transaction granularity.
In order to build a tractable fault tolerant programming
model, FA-MPI chooses to restrict MPI message passing to
non-blocking communication operations at present, then extends MPI functionality with a transactional model designed
to allow a series of communication, computation and I/O
operations operations to be “tried” and then “committed”
when all operations succeed, or be partially or completely
“rolled backward” or “rolled forward” when some operations
or processes fail. TryBlock is the fundamental building block
of FA-MPI model. FA-MPI suggests a “per-transaction”—
in contrast to “per-operation”—failure management. Try-
Blocks open an entire window of opportunity for different
degrees of optimization.
A TryBlock starts with MPI_TRYBLOCK_STARTFA-MPI
1
, which
is a locally collective operation2that binds a communicator
to the TryBlock’s request handle. A TryBlock is completed
(committed) by MPI_TRYBLOCK_FINISHFA-MPI. This function
first acts as an MPI_WAITALL on the set of given request handles and then if the group-wise transaction flag is set in
MPI_TRYBLOCK_STARTFA-MPI, it act as a synchronizing nonblocking collective operation that broadcast failures in a
fault-tolerant collective over all surviving processes in the
TryBlock’s communicator’s group. Upon return from this
call, all surviving processes in the communicator’s group will
have the same view of the system regarding faults. However
if consensus cannot be reached, an error code defining this
state is returned. TryBlocks can be both local and groupwise. In case of local, no synchronization needs to be done
in the MPI_TRYBLOCK_FINISHFA-MPI.
FA-MPI allows an application to detect and raise any failure (that cannot be detected by MPI itself) and to synchronize it at the end of transaction. This can be done
through the application of MPI_REQUEST_RAISE_ERRORFA-MPI.
These errors can be anything from predictions of failures,
disk and process failures, computation errors, soft faults,
etc. Also the API for raising errors allows applications to
test their fault-tolerant methodology by intentional error injection. Once every process in a group knows about a given
failure, appropriate action can potentially be taken (this action or actions is up to the application). Along with failure
injection, application can “query” for failures through usage
of the mechanisms introduced in [6].
FA-MPI is not limited to a certain fault model such as
single-event upset or process crashes. The fact that TryBlocks request handle contains all information about failures
in the TryBlock, tools can be developed (probably outside
the MPI standard but similar to the MPI’s tools API) to
query and recover from such errors (when underlying resources and system health otherwise allow). Such tools can
plausibly be automated and be written once and used several
times with minor configuration changes, perhaps with only
limited platform-specific logic. Such an approach would allow third-party libraries to provide a set of (semi-)automatic
tools for recovery to complement FA-MPI’s mechanisms.
In closing, we note that FA-MPI incorporates timeout
mechanisms at the user thread to avoid the extra overhead
and deadlocks that can be introduced by different types of
hard and soft failures.
2.2 ULFM
User-level failure mitigation (ULFM) [1, 2] is a proposal
for a fault-tolerant MPI designed by the MPI Forum’s faulttolerance working group (FTWG) and is currently under
development and standardization as part of the MPI-4 standard (it began during the standardization of MPI-3). The
goal of ULFM is to add fault-tolerant support to MPI through
which a wide range of fault-tolerant techniques to be implemented. ULFM adds a minimal set of API extensions to
1We suffix all functions with the name of the proposal that
would add them to MPI if not already part of the MPI
standard.
2Every process in the group of a communicator must call
the operation in a bounded amount of time but there is no
need for actual synchronization.
MPI and is more suitable for libraries providing resilience
rather than for direct use by applications. It only addresses
process failure and masks transient failures into process failure as a simplified approach to handling other faults. Process failure is defined as a state when a process becomes
permanently unresponsive. Backward compatibility is one
of the main concerns in the design of ULFM and support
for legacy code is deemed important. In its current versions,
ULFM imposes “per-operation” failure management.
ULFM semantics are based on returning exception (error)
codes from MPI routines involving in a communication. If
an MPI operation is related to a crashed process and cannot
continue execution or return correct results, the operation
will return appropriate error codes such as MPI_ERR_PROC_-
FAILEDULFM. The application then has to acknowledge this
failure and either get the group of locally known failed ranks
or continue execution ignoring failed processes. Revoking
a communicator provides global error propagation and can
prevents deadlock in blocking communication operations.
MPI_COMM_FAILURE_ACKULFM is designed to acknowledge the
locally known failures to prevent further communication functions from returning exceptions related to process failure of
a specific rank. Point-to-point communication involving a
failed process always return the exception and collective operations also always return the exception even with only one
process failure (the return code in some collectives such as
broadcast can vary in different ranks of a communicator).
It seems that this function is useful only for any receive operations with wildcards for the source of communication. It
basically re-enables the outstanding wildcards in the communicator involving a failed process. But any failure should
be acknowledged for further recovery even if no wildcard is
used. Fundamentally, the use of this function couples the
user thread with failure detection.
MPI_COMM_FAILURE_GET_ACKEDULFM returns the group of locally acknowledged failed ranks in a communicator. Locally
known failed ranks are useful when application is strictly
performing point-to-point or one-sided operations, but when
collectives are used, locally known failures are not useful and
further processing should be done for group-wise failure recovery.
MPI_COMM_SHRINKULFM removes all failed ranks in a communicator and creates a smaller communicator with only instantaneously healthy ranks. In order for a group of peers to
agree on a decision value, the ULFM design uses MPI_COMM_-
(I)AGREEULFM. Agreement can be used to obtain transparent
global fault/failure propagation. MPI_COMM_REVOKEULFM is a
failure notification function. It is not a collective function
but it impacts all the processes in the given communicator
by invalidating the communicator as failed. Once a communicator is revoked, no other communication operation
on the communicator can be performed, except MPI_COMM_-
SHRINKULFM and MPI_COMM_(I)AGREEULFM. To use MPI_COMM_-
REVOKEULFM one should first detect if a deadlock has occurred.
A call to this function will cause all pending requests on a
communicator to return; otherwise freeing a failed communicator is not necessary. Similar functions exist for MPI
window and file objects within the ULFM model.
2.3 Leveraging ULFM
The main standardization goal of ULFM is backward compatibility with MPI-3 (and, in the future, MPI-4) and this
has led to a synchronous and blocking design of its seman-
tics. In order to leverage ULFM’s design for a more generalized and so-called weakened solution, there is a need
for semantic modifications. The goal of ULFM has been to
keep the number of API routines as small as possible, but
the number of APIs is not as important as how much complexity a given approach will add to MPI implementations
itself and to MPI applications,3
ULFM requires the involvement of the user thread to verify the detection of process failures. In order to separate out
the involvement of the user thread, this requirement should
be modified4. One means to achieve this goal is to relax this
requirement by removing the need for failure acknowledgement. Since a failure detector should exist in MPI implementations or a system’s underlying layers to achieve consensus,
removing this function only changes the fault management
semantics of receive operations for wildcards. A new operation (such as MPI_COMM_REENABLE_WILDCARDG-ULFM)
5
could be
introduced instead. Another approach would be a routine
directly to disable the wildcards whenever necessary instead
of attempts to re-enable them. Data parallel programs often
do not use wildcards so there is no impact on these common
types of MPI applications.
As discussed earlier, no practical fault-tolerant solution
in large scale systems can guarantee full consistency at all
times. In order to achieve “less complicated” consensus, processes should log their consensus state on reliable storage
and restart with access to the same reliable storage for recovery, but this is not desirable for an MPI implementation because high overhead of logging. This requirement
should be visible in the ULFM’s agreement function. Currently, the agreement function offers/promises/attempts full
consistency by returning consistent error codes (or success)
at all surviving ranks in a communicator. However, there
should be a mechanism, such as new error code, indicating
that achievement of consistency is not possible, or indicating that consistency has been achieved at approximately P
ranks (1  P < N), where N is the number of processes in
the group of the communicator. This approach could lead to
support (or at least notification) of failures such as network
partitioning.
The current communicator shrink operation in ULFM changes
ranks in some of the processes. However, certain applications need to preserve their ranks. There is a need for an operation such as “shrink and grow” to keep the ranks the same
and spawn new processes for failed ranks. Although the
current specification does not include a non-blocking shrink
operation, there have been suggestions about adding this
function to the proposal and FA-MPI, for instance, would
require this changes to the specification in order to be useful
for a better asynchronous recovery in applications.
3. COMPARISON AND CONTRAST
While ULFM’s goal is strong backward compatibility, FA3FA-MPI takes the alternative approach of seeking to add
less complexity and overhead in favor of increased in number
of APIs.
4The FA-MPI approach is “fault bypass” vs ULFM’s “in
thread detection.”
5By G-ULFM we introduce our generalization of ULFM designed to provide a more asynchronous and less demanding
set of requirements for fault awareness; in particular we will
not require complete consensus. G-ULFM will prove easier
to integrate with FA-MPI than canonical ULFM.
MPI considers only a non-blocking subset of MPI. This choice
is made because of complexities that blocking MPI introduce
for resilience. In contrast to ULFM’s choice only to support
process failure, FA-MPI can support several fault-models including process failure, application- detected failures (disk
failure, soft errors), communication failure, and resource exhaustion related failures.
Performance Resilience 
Scalability 
API 
Portability 
FT 
Portability 
FA#MPI'
ULFM'
Figure 1: Configurability of two approaches
As shown in Figure 3, in comparison to ULFM, FA-MPI
allows trade-offs between scalability, performance, and acquired resiliency through variations of the granularity and
hierarchy of TryBlocks along with configuring of TryBlock
(local or group-wise) being used. However, this strategy
may result in less portability of the fault-tolerant method
being used as an application running in different systems
at different scales requiring modifications of the transaction
granularity to achieve maximum performance and resilience.
Since both proposal APIs are being proposed as set of MPI
routines, API portability will remain valid.
In this section, we discuss partial reducibility of the two
proposals to each other. We define the reducibility of proposal A to B as the ability to implement B’s API and semantics using A’s API and semantics. Although both proposals are promising concepts and can be used in conjunction,
it may not be possible to reduce exact APIs to each other,
however one’s concepts partially can be implemented and/or
used by the other.
3.1 FA-MPI meets ULFM
The issue discussed here is how FA-MPI can use ULFM
constructs to survive process crashes, while also supporting other fault models. Since ULFM encourages libraries to
implement complementary fault-tolerant semantics on top
of it, it appears logical that FA-MPI should use the process
fault-tolerant semantics of ULFM. In this section, we discuss
why ULFM has to be generalized to be asynchronous to user
thread and how FA-MPI can only use such the non-blocking
subset ULFM.
BSP-likes applications use a large number of communication and computation operations and use barrier synchronization before moving to the next iteration. This concept is
being used in FA-MPI to allow detection, isolation, mitigation, and recovery to be done after the synchronization point
(MPI_TRYBLOCK_FINISHFA-MPI). In other words, an optimal
implementation using FA-MPI does not check for errors and
failures in the critical path of computation. However, ULFM
requires the acknowledgement of locally known failures in order to complete communication operations. In other words,
ULFM needs the user thread to acknowledge each failure
detection and as ULFM semantics demands, if failure is not
acknowledged, it cannot appear in list of locally known or
group-wise failures. In the view FA-MPI, acknowledging for
locally known failures is not important because all failure
detections are done at the end of TryBlock. Acknowledging failures is useful only for implementation of the consensus algorithm that add and remove processes to their list of
suspected failed ranks and acknowledgement should not be
used at MPI level. In order to achieve both application bypass and “fault bypass,” this acknowledgement should not be
a requirement for failure detection. The acknowledgement
contradicts the approach of separating failure management
from the user thread. To solve this problem, a new routine
should be introduced just to re-enable the receives with wild
cards or to disable them whenever necessary.
A nominal implementation of MPI_TRYBLOCK_FINISHFA-MPI
can be an agreement algorithm followed by a fault-tolerant
collective (for group-wise error propagation). This can be
implemented using MPI_COMM_IAGREEULFM inside a loop to bypass the locally known failures, followed by a fault-tolerant
collective if any process in the group should have detected
any faults. However, if agreement is not used (because the
rate of faults cannot be so high to interrupt the flow of
program), implementations may be able to optimize the algorithm to remove the following fault-tolerant collective in
many low-fault cases. This motivates the idea that low faultfree overhead is needed and this overhead should increase
only by increased number of consecutive faults. If agreement is used, the fault-free overhead is O(allreduce) and
in case of fault the overhead will be roughly O(allreduce ×
num retries + allreduce).
A better semantic approach for the agreement function
is to allow more information to be exchanged rather than
simply an integer value. This can be achieved by changing
the value of integer to a larger size array struct. Also another
suggestion is to change the bitwise AND of the integer flag of
agreement function to bitwise OR. A bitwise AND makes the
final value based on the decision of a single process. For
example, if one of the processes decide value “zero,” then
the final value will be “zero”. However with a bitwise OR,
the same decision can be made if different bits are used for
informing different decisions. For instance, a success can
be ’1’ while a failure can be ’2’. If the final value is ’1’,
then where was no failure, and if the final value was ’3’
then some processes reported failure. If dead processes will
implicitly contribute ’0’ to the flag, then AND operation will
make sense, but since in ULFM semantics crashed processes
do not contribute to the value of flag, a bitwise OR is more
logical (more useful).
In ULFM’s semantics, failure propagation is coupled with
failure recovery through the revoke operation. Revoke is a
failure-propagation mechanism such that if a process should
detect a deadlock, it can revoke the communicator. Revoking a communicator causes associated communicators of all
ranks in the communicator’s group, skipping failed ranks,
to become invalid permanently for future operations. This
routine could be used by FA-MPI to invalidate the communicator for further removal at the end of a TryBlock,
but it should never be used inside a TryBlock. But, if
the MPI implementation can offer effective garbage collection and the system can allow some resources be dedicated
for resource exhaustion management and operation cancelation through retrieving resources, then FA-MPI can operate
without revoking the communicator. Another suggestion
is the local version of this function, namely MPI_COMM_REVOKE_LOCALG-ULFM. This new function is collective and only
invalidates the communicator locally and has no effect on
other processes.
FA-MPI could utilize ULFM as the survival mechanism
from process failure if the aforementioned modifications were
made to the current ULFM proposal. In this case, the only
ULFM routines that are needed for FA-MPI are: MPI_-
COMM_IAGREEULFM, MPI_COMM_ISHRINKG-ULFM (not in the specification yet), and operations to obtain list of known failures such as MPI_COMM_FAILURE_GET_ACKEDULFM and MPI_-
WIN_GET_FAILEDULFM.
3.2 ULFM meets FA-MPI
Unlike FA-MPI, ULFM only addresses process crashes so
ULFM cannot be a total substitution for FA-MPI. However, we will show how FA-MPI can be reduced into a peroperation and blocking fault-tolerant API such as ULFM.
Since a TryBlock can span the fault-management boundary
anywhere from start and end of the application to a single
operation, similar functionality to ULFM can be achieved by
first converting blocking operations into non-blocking, then
protecting each MPI routine by a TryBlock as the pseudocode in Figure 3.2. However this conversion will have
high overhead and is not an ideal solution; it is shown to
help identify how the two proposals are related.
MPI_Tryblock_start (comm , MPI_TRYBLOCK_LOCAL ,& tryreq );
MPI_Ioperation (input ,& request );
MPI_Tryblock_finish ( tryreq ,1 ,& request );
rc = MPI_Wait (& tryreq ,& trystat );
/* check rc followed by failure query functions for
failure notific ations */
Figure 2: Using FA-MPI to capture per-operation
failure management such as ULFM
Agreement function can be implemented, partially, using
only an empty TryBlock as shown in Figure 3.2. However
it is not possible to carry the integer flag in the agreement
function for bitwise AND among all alive peers, but similar
functionality can be achieved by rasing an error value on
TryBlock’s request handle inside the TryBlock and check for
group-wise failures at the end. Other APIs such as revoke
and failure acknowledgement cannot be implemented using
FA-MPI.
MPI_Tryblock_start (comm , MPI_TRYBLOCK_GLOBAL ,& tryreq );
MPI_Tryblock_finish ( tryreq ,0 , MPI_REQUEST_NULL );
rc = MPI_Wait (& tryreq ,& trystat );
/* check rc followed by failure query functions for
failure notific ations */
Figure 3: Implementation of agreement function using TryBlocks in FA-MPI.
3.3 Combining Approaches
Along with discussion of implementation of FA-MPI using
ULFM, ULFM routines can be used in conjunction with FA-
Features ULFM G-ULFM FA-MPI G-ULFM+FA-MPI
Support entire MPI 3.0 yes yes no yes
Per-operation fault-management yes yes no (optional) no
Per-transaction fault-management no no yes yes
Guaranty of full consistency yes no no no
Asynchronous to user thread no yes yes yes
Hierarchical fault-management no no yes yes
Fixed granularity of failure detection yes no no no
Heavyweight revoke yes no no no
Support multiple fault models no no yes yes
Portable error code yes yes no no
Table 1: Overview of futures of current and future fault-tolerant MPIs. Preferred features are marked as
bold face.
MPI for failure management of blocking operations. In other
words, FA-MPI can support synchronous fault-tolerance with
the help of ULFM. One simple way to do this is by allowing
blocking communication functions to return from process
failure and this error could be raised on a TryBlock’s request handle. Although this might reduce the capabilities
of TryBlocks, it can be a nominal solution for a synchronous
MPI application. This functionality is shown in Figure 3.3.
MPI_Tryblock_start (comm , MPI_TRYBLOCK_LOCAL ,& tryreq );
rc = MPI_operation (input ,& request );
if(rc == MPI_PROC_FAILED )
MPI_Request_raise_error ( tryreq ,rc);
/* ... */
MPI_Tryblock_finish ( tryreq ,1 ,& request );
rc = MPI_Wait (& tryreq ,& trystat );
/* check ’rc ’ followed by failure query functions for
failure notific ations . If there was an error ,
preferably shrink the communicator and recover .*/
Figure 4: Using FA-MPI and ULFM for a blocking
application.
This latter functionality might be important as application needs and fault models are different and just one faulttolerant method might not be sufficient for a big application
based on a number of code sources and libraries. This flexibility opens the opportunity for an application with mixed
synchronicity semantics to utilize both approaches to gain
more reliability at run time. Table 3.3 captures the current
features in both proposals plus features that can be introduced by using the two approaches together.
4. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper discusses approaches taken by two current
fault-tolerant MPI proposals (ULFM and FA-MPI). A comparison and contrast between these proposals is presented
and the discussion is followed by methodology of how can
they complement each other. Overall, we would prefer that
ULFM semantics were more asynchronous to the user thread
and be “weakened” regarding consistency to help make trade
offs of scalability and fault-free overhead (at the expense
of potentially hierarchical recovery). An example is the
weakening consistency requirements of the agreement operation to reduce its per-invocation overhead. Weakened
consistency can be achieved partially by a timeout mechanisms and tunable algorithms. If these two requirements
were added to ULFM, then FA-MPI could utilize a subset of
that extended ULFM system (including only asynchronous
operations to detect and survive from process failures). We
discussed why these requirements are needed for future extreme scale systems, and showed both a generalized ULFM
model (G-ULFM), discussed conceptual integration of our
G-ULFM model with FA-MPI.
For the future, we intend to demonstrate both the benefits of extending and modifying ULFM into G-ULFM, as
well as providing successively more capable working prototypes of FA-MPI (independent of G-ULFM). Our purpose
is to explore integration of FA-MPI with application middleware so that we can also assess how much non-portable
code is needed for specific systems to implement effective
fault tolerance on a specific system.
5. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under grant CCF-1239962 and Sandia National Laboratories under grant PO-1330625. Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-program laboratory managed
and operated by Sandia Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin Corporation, for the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-AC04-94AL85000.
References
[1] W. Bland, G. Bosilca, A. Bouteiller, T. Herault, and
J. Dongarra. A proposal for user-level failure mitigation in the MPI-3 standard. Technical report, Tech.
rep., Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of Tennessee, 2012.
[2] W. Bland, A. Bouteiller, T. Herault, G. Bosilca, and
J. Dongarra. Post-failure recovery of MPI communication capability design and rationale. International
Journal of High Performance Computing Applications,
27(3):244–254, Aug. 2013.
[3] T. D. Chandra and S. Toueg. Unreliable failure detectors for reliable distributed systems. J. ACM,
43(2):225–267, Mar. 1996.
[4] R. Dimitrov and A. Skjellum. Software architecture
and performance comparison of mpi/pro and mpich.
In International Conference on Computational Science,
pages 307–315, 2003.
[5] M. J. Fischer, N. A. Lynch, and M. S. Paterson. Impossibility of distributed consensus with one faulty process.
Journal of the ACM (JACM), 32(2):374ˆaA¸S382, 1985. ˘
[6] A. Hassani, A. Skjellum, and R. Brightwell. Design and
evaluation of FA-MPI, a transactional resilience scheme
for non-blocking MPI. FTXS ’14, Atlanta, GA, June
2014.
[7] J. Hursey, T. Naughton, G. VallAl’e, and R. L. Graham. ˜
A log-scaling fault tolerant agreement algorithm for a
fault tolerant MPI. In EuroMPI, pages 255–263, 2011.
[8] Message Passing Interface Forum. MPI: a messagepassing interface standard version 3.0. Technical report,
Sept. 2012.
[9] K. Sato, N. Maruyama, K. Mohror, A. Moody, T. Gamblin, B. R. de Supinski, and S. Matsuoka. Design
and modeling of a non-blocking checkpointing system. In Proceedings of the International Conference
on High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage
and Analysis, SC ’12, pages 19:1–19:10, Los Alamitos,
CA, USA, 2012. IEEE Computer Society Press.
[10] B. Schroeder and G. Gibson. A large-scale study of
failures in high-performance computing systems. IEEE
Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing,
7(4):337–350, Dec. 2010.
[11] A. Skjellum and P. V. Bangalore. FA-MPI: fault-aware
MPI specification and concept of operations: A transactional message passing interface & an alternative proposal to the MPI-3 forum. Technical Report UABCISTR-2012-011912, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Computer and Information Sciences, Feb. 2012.