Available online 28 August 2021 0167-8191/© 2021 Published by Elsevier B.V.

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Parallel Computing journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/parco

Implementation and evaluation of MPI 4.0 partitioned communicationlibrariesMatthew G.F. Dosanjh a, Andrew Worley b, Derek Schafer c, Prema Soundararajan d,Sheikh Ghafoor b, Anthony Skjellum c, ∗, Purushotham V. Bangalore e, Ryan E. Grant a,f a Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, NM, United States of Americab Tennessee Tech University, Cookeville, TN, United States of Americac University of Tennessee at Chattanooga, Chattanooga, TN, United States of Americad University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, United States of Americae University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL, United States of Americaf Queens University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada A R T I C L E I N F O

Keywords:MPIPartitioned communicationPoint-to-point partitioned

A B S T R A C T

Partitioned point-to-point communication primitives provide a performance-oriented mechanism to supporta hybrid parallel programming model and have been included in the upcoming MPI-4.0 standard. Theseprimitives enable an MPI library to transfer parts of the data buffer while the application provides partialcontributions using multiple threads or tasks or simply pipelines the buffers sequentially. The focus of thispaper is the design and implementation of a layered library that provides the functionality of these newerAPIs and supports application development using these newer APIs. This library provides an opportunity toexplore potential optimizations and identify further enhancements to the APIs. Initial experience in designingthis library along with preliminary performance results are presented. In addition, the library is comparedto initial prototype libraries that have recently become available that have been updated to the standardcompliant interface. These prototype libraries were built on remote-memory-access (RMA) primitives, offeringinsight into different implementation strategies. In general, we observe an interesting trade-off space, with theRMA-based implementation proving more performant for send-side partitioning, with increases in perceivedbandwidth 8.9x on average over a single send, compared to the persistent-based implementation, which showsimprovements 4.0x on average. In comparing the two implementations, we find that the persistent-basedimplementation enables more overlap for receive-side partitioning up to 5.37X the RMA library’s overlap,while the RMA-based implementation provides better send-side performance of up to 70%.

## 1. Introduction

Partitioned point-to-point communication was introduced [1] as analternative to the failed MPI endpoints concept [2]. This was basedon application developer feedback from a major survey in the US forexascale MPI development that indicated applications wanted RMA-likeperformance benefits for multi-threading but with a send-receive-typemodel [3]. Partitioned point-to-point operations provide a thread interface for message passing that supports pipelined and parallel messagebuffer filling and emptying, with the potential for overlapping buffercompletion with transfer. This type of pipelining can have significantbenefits for hybrid programming, such as MPI and OpenMP with forkjoin assembly of messages in non-overlapping partitions (send-side ∗ Corresponding author.E-mail addresses: mdosanj@sandia.gov (M.G.F. Dosanjh), apworley42@tntech.edu (A. Worley), derek-schafer@utc.edu (D. Schafer), prema@uab.edu(P. Soundararajan), sghafoor@tntech.edu (S. Ghafoor), tony-skjellum@utc.edu (A. Skjellum), pvbangalore@ua.edu (P.V. Bangalore), ryan.grant@queensu.ca(R.E. Grant).

overlap of computation and communication) and/or partitioned completion of messages for overlapping receipt and work as data is received(receive-side overlap of communication and computation). Further,this model addresses the concerns raised for the send-receive modeland endpoints model regarding the growth of the message queueson the receive-side of transfers while also avoiding the need for theentirety of an MPI implementation function in the lower performanceMPI_THREAD_MULTIPLE mode [1,4]. Our motivation for the presentwork is to make a standalone MPI library that enables partitioned communication in MPI implementations. Since partitioned communicationis new in MPI 4.0 [5], there are few, if any, public implementationscurrently available. Availability of a functional library that is portable https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parco.2021.102827Received 15 February 2021; Received in revised form 10 June 2021; Accepted 13 August 2021

will enable adoption and provide a reference implementation for MPIlibrary-specific implementations that will be optimized over the nextmonths as MPI-4.0 becomes fully supported. We have prototyped aportable MPI extension library (with the MPIX function name denotingfunctions that are not included in the MPI Standard yet). This extensionlibrary implements the partitioned communication API on top of anyexisting MPI library. This design choice means that our library can beused to help applications experiment with partitioned communicationas one of the communication options. These applications can test outhow partitioned communication helps new algorithms and providesdevelopers with an opportunity to get familiar with how partitionedcommunication operations behave. Then, when larger-scale MPI implementations have fully integrated the partitioned communicationAPI into their libraries, developers and applications will be ready fordeployment in a production settings without changes to their sourcecode.

## 2. Background

As interest in efficient multi-threaded MPI programming has increased in recent years [3], there have been several proposals forsupporting large numbers of threads with MPI that differ from thetraditional multi-threaded environment offered in the MPI standard.Expressing concurrency to the MPI library in a form more complicatedthan asking for multi-thread safe MPI calls has the potential to unleashgreater performance from MPI. The first of such recent attempts wascalled endpoints [2] and aimed to expose individual threads as networkaddress targets in MPI (i.e., MPI process ranks). Unfortunately, this effort failed to be adopted by the MPI Forum because, although it offereda new way to address threads, it had drawbacks to how hardware couldefficiently support such MPI mechanisms. For example, it expandedthe MPI ‘‘process rank space’’ from the default MPI_COMM_WORLD communicator in codes today to one of size in proportion to the numberof threads used. This made it difficult to use hardware-level addressingtranslations in networking hardware that supported such features [6].And, much of the performance benefit of the endpoints approach couldalso be hidden from the user inside the MPI library [7,8].The successor effort to endpoints was finepoints [1,9]. The approachin finepoints was to express a single MPI operation in such a mannerthat multiple threads could contribute to it in an efficient manner.This deviated from the endpoints approach significantly since multiple threads contributed to a single operation (as opposed to eachperforming separate operations), and threads were not individuallyaddressable with an MPI process. This kept the process rank spacefrom expanding beyond that expressed by MPI_COMM_WORLD. Themotivations for this design were results indicating issues around theprocessing of the large number of messages that could be extrapolatedfor future highly concurrent systems [4]. While it had been apparentfor some time that network interface cards (NICs) that onloaded mostof the communication message processing to the CPU could become abottleneck with the move to many-core type architectures [10], it wasnot until recent studies and purpose-built benchmarks were developedthat the magnitude of the overheads of processing such large volumes ofmessages became clear [11]. Finepoints addresses this issue by keepingthe MPI level message volume identical to the single-threaded MPImodel. Finepoints eventually evolved into MPI partitioned point-topoint communication in the MPI standard in version 4.0, formallyapproved by the MPI Forum in June, 2021.

2.1. Introduction to partitioned point-to-point communication

MPI partitioned point-to-point communication adds several newfunctions to the MPI standard. The functions added in MPI 4.0 areshown in Table 1.To illustrate the basic usage of partitioned point-to-point communication, we provide two code examples demonstrating simple use cases for the send-side in Listing 1 and for the recv-side in Listing 2 as MPIcode in C. The basic setup of a partitioned is similar to persistentcommunication operations. The partitioned operation begins with a callto an initialization function, Line 1 in Listings 1 and 2. These functionsreturns a handle to a request object used to query the operation. Aspart of the call, the user defines a number of partitions on each side ofthe communication. Each partition consists of an independent portionof the communication buffer. Of note is that the number of sender andreceiver partitions do not have to be related to each other, only theoverall size of buffer must be consistent.After initialization, the overall partitioned operation is then markedas active by a call to MPI_Start, Line 4; however, unlike persistentoperations, data transmission is not started immediately. Data transmission is instead devolved to a secondary function associated with eachuser-defined partition. This function, MPI_Pready, is only called onthe sending side Listing 1, Line 8, and is called once per partition. EachMPI_Pready call activates a portion of the overall request to allowthat partition to be transmitted. Before the call to MPI_Pready, thebuffer partition has not entered the active stage, thus can be modified.After a partition calls MPI_Pready and transitions to an active state,the transmission of the partition is handled by the library.The MPI standard grants a high degree of freedom for how thistransmission occurs, including permission to delay some initializationsteps up until the point of transmission. Completion of the overall operation can be queried by current existing functions such as MPI_Test or MPI_Wait. Additional information on the completion status ofindividual receiver partitions can be found by calling MPI_Parrived on the partition in question. Once the operation is complete, resourcescan be released by calling MPI_Request_Free on the appropriateMPI_Request handle.In our receive-side example in Listing 2, we have denoted severalopportunities for the application to do computational work while waiting for the incoming partitioned communication operation to complete.While it is possible for the receive-side to be aware of individualpartition completions, we have not demonstrated this in our codeexample. Next, we will demonstrate the use of the MPI_Parrived function in a high level flow diagram. 1 MPI_Psend_init (& buffer , partitions , count , datatype , dest , tag , comm , info , &request); 2 3 for (i=0; i< num_iterations ; i++){ 4 MPI_Start (& request); 5 /* Parallel loop with some number of threads */ 6 parallel for (partition =0; partition <10; partition ++) { 7 /* Do work to fill partition# portion of buffer */ 8 MPI_Pready (partition , &request); 9 } 10 MPI_Wait {& request }; 11 }

Listing 1: Example Partitioned Point-to-Point Communicationsend-side code 
1 MPI_Precv_init (& buffer , partitions , 
count , datatype , source , tag , comm , 
info , &request); 
2 
3 for (i=0; i< num_iterations ; i++){ 
4 MPI_Start (& request); 
5 /* Parallel loop with some number of 
threads */ 
6 parallel for (loop =0; loop <10; loop 
++) { 
7 /* do compute work */ 

Table 1MPI 4.0 and 4.1 partitioned point-to-point communication application programmer interface (API) [5].Approved MPI 4.0 functions C language binding MPI_Psend_init void *buf, int partitions, MPI_Count count, MPI_Datatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI_Comm comm, MPI_Info info, MPI_Request *request MPI_Precv_init void *buf, int partitions, MPI_Count count, MPI_Datatype datatype, int source, int tag, MPI_Comm comm, MPI_Info info, MPI_Request *request MPI_Pready int partition, MPI_Request *request MPI_Pready_range int partition_low, int partition_high, MPI_Request *request MPI_Pready_list int length, int array_of_partitions[], MPI_Request *request MPI_Parrived MPI_Request *request, int partition, int *flag Proposed MPI 4.1 functions MPI_Pbuf_prepare MPI_Request request MPI_Pbuf_prepareall int count, MPI_Request requests[]

Fig. 1. Overview of Partitioned Point-to-Point Communication.

8 MPI_Parrived (& request , loop , &flag); 
9 /* do work on early arrivals if 
available if not goto next iteration 
*/ 
10 } 
11 MPI_Test (& request , &flag , 
MPI_STATUS_IGNORE ); 
12 } 

Listing 2: Example Partitioned Point-to-Point CommunicationReceive-side Code

The basic control and data flow is illustrated in Fig. 1. Like ourprevious code examples, the developer calls an initializing function like MPI_P*_init followed by a call to MPI_Start. As portions of thedata buffer become ready to send corresponding to a given partition expressed to MPI in the initialization call, the user calls MPI_Pready toindicate that it is safe to move the data in that partition to the receiver.Unlike our previous code examples, Fig. 1 shows the optional receiveside MPI_Parrived call that the receiver can use to determine if itcan access a given partition’s portion of the incoming data buffer beforethe MPI operation itself is complete (the MPI operation is indicated ascomplete after a successful return from MPI_Wait or MPI_Test).

## 3. Partitioned communication

Partitioned communication is a technique introduced in MPI 4.0 toperform point-to-point communications efficiently with high levels ofconcurrency (threads). Previous work on partitioned communicationhas focused on prototype libraries [1,9] and performance that was usedas a basis for the interface that was adopted in MPI 4.0, but variedin significant ways, making the libraries not directly comparable toones that implement the final MPI-4.0-approved interface. Some ofthese differences in interface included buffer length and management,and whether the MPI library or the user should define the partitions.The official MPI 4.0 interface asks the user to define the equal-sizepartitions rather than asking the library to handle all edge cases wherethe user could erroneously define a partition layout that was not easilypartitioned.Partitioned communication is applicable to highly threaded CPUside MPI codes but has significant predicted utility for GPU-side MPIkernel calls with low expected overheads. Current proposals are underway for MPI 4.1 further to optimize a GPU-side implementationof a MPI_Pready call on the GPU to trigger data movement. Therefore, providing partitioned communication libraries as soon as possible to the MPI application developer community is a critical aspectof application readiness for next-generation supercomputers. Whilethe libraries presented here are not GPU-based, they nonetheless allow developers to being the coding process today and make performance analyses for their codes. The process of converting a CPU-sidepartitioned communication exchange to a GPU-side one is relativelystraightforward.Since partitioned communication is included in MPI 4.0, all MPIlibraries will have to add this functionality to their implementations.This work provides the first comparison between two different, reasonable approaches to implementing partitioned communication calls. Aspartitioned communication adopts some aspects of MPI RMA becauseof its design being intended to work with Remote Direct MemoryAccess (RDMA) semantics. Therefore, a partitioned communication implementation based on RMA/RDMA is a logical approach. Partitionedcommunication also adopts elements of persistent communication inMPI, making it another obvious approach on which to build partitionedcommunication support. This paper extends previous work focusingon a persistent communication library implementation of partitionedcommunication [12] by comparing performance between it and anRMA-based library. 3.1. Partitioned operation library via persistent MPI interfaces

A library called MPIPCL was implemented to perform partitionedcommunication based on persistent point-to-point MPI operations [12].MPIPCL layers on top of existing MPI implementations and providesall of the MPI 4.0 standard functionality. Therefore, there are not asmany opportunities to provide aggregation of messages and overlapof communication and computation with the partitioned operations aswith a native solution. Partitions are broken up into multiple persistentpoint-to-point operations and triggered to move data when the usercalls MPI_Pready.

Table 2List of provided functions in MPIPCL.Partition functions Augmented functions MPI_Psend_init MPI_Start MPI_Precv_init MPI_Startall MPI_Pready MPI_Wait MPI_Pready_range MPI_Waitall MPI_Pready_list MPI_Waitany MPI_Parrived MPI_Waitsome MPIX_Pbuf_prepare MPI_Test MPIX_Pbuf_prepareallall MPI_Testall MPI_Testany MPI_Testsome MPI_Request_free 3.2. MPIPCL library implementation details The functions listed in Table 2 represent those that our library hasimplemented on top of the existing MPI library. The six partitionedcommunication functions on the left-hand side that start with MPI_ represent new functionality that is to appear in the MPI 4.0 standard,the remaining two are not yet accepted in the standard and use theMPIX_ denotation. The functions on the right are reimplemented (augmented) functions to enable support for the new request object (anattendant side effect of a layered implementation).

3.2.1. New request objectNormal MPI_Request objects have no mechanism to keep trackof partial progress of the request. Because partitioned requests area collection of underlying partial communications, it is necessary tomaintain a more flexible record of completion than would normallybe needed. As such, a new request object was created for use withthe MPIPCL library. As shown in Listing 3, the new request objectcontains metadata about the overall request as well as an internal arrayof requests to fulfill. 1 typedef struct _mpix_request 2 { 3 int state; 4 int size; 5 int side; 6 int sendparts ; 7 int recvparts ; 8 int readycount ; 9 MPI_Request *request; 10 ... // Other thread information 11 } MPIX_Request ; Listing 3: The MPIX_Request object for the MPI persistentoperation-based library (MPIPCL). 3.2.2. Internal request negotiationMPIPCL is built upon MPI point-to-point communications and assuch requires some additional information to be held in MPI_Request objects. These expanded request objects are not part of the MPI standard and therefore are delineated as experimental with the use of MPIX at the start of their function names as the standard requires for anynon-standard extensions to MPI. Each MPIX_Request object containsa number of standard requests, so the number of sends and receivesneeds to be balanced. The API has no defined mechanism for this tooccur; but, both sides of the communication need to agree in advanceon the internal number of requests generated. The library is meant tobe portable; as such, it does not have access to the implementationspecific control structures. And, the library is forced to use additionalcommunication requests to share the required metadata. This is furthercomplicated by the realization that this setup phase is a blocking process, yet MPI_Psend_init, MPI_Precv_init, and MPI_Start

Fig. 2. Partition Remapping.

are all required to be non-blocking functions. The implemented solution to this is the spawning of a new thread to execute part of thisinitialization operation while still returning control of the main threadback to the program, see Fig. 1. This thread enables the program tocontinue (return immediately) until progress is required of the partitioned request, thus effectively postponing any blocking activities untila blocking procedure is called. Currently, communication is limited tosharing the number of internal requests being sent to the receiver, butcould be used as part of data aggregation or optimization algorithms(something intended for fully optimized partitioned communicationimplementations). 3.2.3. Partition remappingWhen the number of send-side and receive-side partitions are unequal, the data can be remapped inside the receiving buffer (to furtherabstract the user defined partitions away from the internal communication structure). The current method is a simple mapping basedon offsets from the start of the buffer. The MPI_Parrived functioncalculates which portion of the buffer is needed to for the requestedpartition then finds which internal receive requests contain some partthe required data. The data is marked as available only after all thedependent partitions have arrived. This effectively allows the user todefine any number of partitions at either end, while permitting internalmessage aggregation to proceed unhindered. Fig. 2 demonstrates thisapproach.

3.2.4. LimitationsBecause this library current layers on top of existing MPI implementations, there are certain limitations that we would like to address.Currently, because we cannot access the library’s internals, we cannotproperly return a fully formed MPI_Status object. Instead, our current implementation ignores any status objects passed to the function,and similarly uses MPI_STATUS_IGNORE as arguments to any function that requires a status object. In the future, we plan to provide ourown status object to fulfill these needs. The current implementationonly supports primitive built-in datatypes and contiguous datatypes.1

It is anticipated that applications that use partitioned communication will use multiple threads to achieve the best performance; thatis, multiple threads fill or empty buffer partitions concurrently. Inaddition, our current library has an extra thread to achieve some ofthe progress needed to keep the partitioned communications moving.Our library depends on thread support in the MPI implementation,necessitating at least the MPI_THREAD_SERIALIZED level of support by the underlying MPI implementation and any application usingour library must call MPI_Init_thread (with the aforementionedthread support level or greater) instead of MPI_Init. Additionally,since this library is not fully implemented in a unified way inside anyone library, we are limited in how we can optimize our functions.However, we are still aiming to achieve minimal extra overhead (if any) 1 The most performant modes of partitioned communication are likely to becontiguous, partitioned buffers, so this is not a major limitation for an initiallibrary implementation. But, addressing packing/unpacking of partitions isimportant future work for non-contiguous partitions based on MPI user-defined(derived) data types. We intend to consider support for such user-defineddatatypes as a future part of this effort.

Fig. 3. An example of early-bird communication, where with partitioned communication data movement occurs when portions of the buffer become available, thereby allowinguse of the network over a longer period of time than the traditional send model. (For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend, the reader is referred to theweb version of this article.)

Table 3List of provided functions in RMA-based partitionedcommunication library.Partitioned functions Limitations MPI_Psend_init Not non-blockingMPI_Precv_init Not non-blockingMPI_Pready NoneMPI_Pready_range NoneMPI_Pready_list NoneMPI_Parrived None to inform users of potential performance benefits they might get fromusing partitioned communications. Because the library uses persistentpoint-to-point APIs, applications should at least see the performancebenefits of persistent point-to-point APIs, if they are optimized by theunderlying MPI implementation. 3.3. RMA-based library

An alternative implementation approach for MPI partitioned communication is to build the operations on top of MPI RMA. Whilethis is not as ideal as building an implementation on top of RDMAprimitives, using RDMA directly is only possible when done internallyto an MPI library, making the changes implementation specific andnon-portable between MPI libraries. As such, we have developed alibrary based on early prototypes [1] used to prove the usefulnessof MPI partitioned communication. The original prototype librariesneeded additional implementation work to bring them into compliancewith the MPI specification as well as further optimizations to representthe benefit of some of the interfaces changes made for MPI 4.0. A list ofthe MPI partitioned communication functions supported by this libraryis given in Table 3.This implementation uses two, single-direction RMA windows: onefor the data and another for completion flags. To ensure isolationfrom other partitioned communication operations, these windows usea separate communicator between the two processes involved. Becauseof the use of a separate flag window, the two processes need to agreeon a number of completion partitions (the number of completion flags)during initialization. For simplicity, this is done using the greatestcommon denominator, to ensure both send and receive partitions onlycorrespond to a single flag.When MPI_Pready is called, MPI_Put is called correspondingto the referenced partition. After that, a completion partition counteris atomically fetched and incremented, if that counter has reacheda threshold (the number of send partitions per completion partition)MPI_Flush is called on the data window, MPI_Put is called settingthe flag for the completion partition, and finally MPI_Flush is calledon the completion flag window.

3.3.1. LimitationsLike the persistent-operation-based library, the RMA-based libraryis limited to building on top of MPI RMA. This means that the partitioned operations are limited by the feature set available at the MPIlevel and cannot take full advantage of lower-level RDMA primitives.For example, the RMA-based library cannot provide an entirely nonblocking initialization call as it is based on MPI_Win_create, whichis itself a blocking call. There are also limitations to the number andtypes of optimizations that can occur with regards to aggregation as theRMA-based library is not aware of the underlying hardware being usedby the MPI implementation. Therefore, parameters like the networkMaximum Transmission Unit (MTU) cannot be optimized for since thereis no way of knowing what the relevant network values to optimizefor are. This limitation can be remedied by using a fully integratedapproach in the MPI libraries that would allow for further optimization.However, even with the RMA-based libraries limitations, applicationdevelopers can build upon it with the knowledge that the eventualintegrated support will provide better performance and less restrictiveinitialization semantics. 
4. Experimental results 
4.1. Experimental platform and benchmarks 

To compare both of these approaches, we have run a modifiedversion of partitioned communication benchmark used in our priorwork [1,13]. These modifications include updating the interface tomatch the MPI 4.0 spec In this section, we will compare and contrastthe two MPI partitioned communication library implementations witheach other and with traditional MPI communication sends. All of thetests take two parameters to define a computation region, computeand noise. Compute is the expected compute time, and noise is thepercentage delay that is applied to a single thread’s compute time.Noise serves as an analogue to the system noise we would expect to seeon a system, such as having the operating system functionality interruptcomputation on a core. We will examine two types of traditional MPIsend approaches. The first we will refer to as single-send. Single-sendis a single MPI_(I)Send operation for the entire buffer, the mostcommonly used MPI point-to-point communication call. The secondapproach we refer to as multi-send. The multi-send approach uses aseparate MPI_(I)Send call for each thread which is the most similarmethod in traditional MPI to accomplish an approach like partitionedcommunication. Third, we will test sender-side partitioning, by converting the MPI_(I)Send calls in the multi-send test with MPI_Pready calls on different partitions a single combined partitioned request.Finally, we added a new test to measure receive-side partitioning. Thistest adds a measurement to time between when the first partition hasarrived (as reported by MPI_Parrived) and when the final partitionarrived (as reported by MPI_Wait).These benchmarks emulate a threaded computation phase withnoise (jitter) on a single thread prior to a communication phase every

iteration. This emulated computation is done by sleeping the threadsfor the amount of time equal to a user-specified computation time,with the noise-impacted thread sleeping for a user-specified additionalpercentage of that time. Of these two tests, the first test measures theperformance effect of sender-side ’early bird’ communication and thesecond test measures the effect of receiver-side early notification. Bothuse a compute time and noise factor to emulate a computation periodwhere a single thread is delayed by noise (details are in Section 4.2).The first test measures ‘‘perceived bandwidth’’ from the sender-sideperspective; the bandwidth as it appears from the last thread joiningthe communication to the completion of the communication. Perceivedbandwidth is equivalent to how fast a network would have to be to observe the same time period between calling the single large buffer sendcall and the MPI completion function (e.g., MPI_Wait or MPI_Test)returning. A visual example of this can be seen in Fig. 3 between thetime noted as all threads being completed to the green completion boxon the timeline. Because this test does not utilize MPI_Parrived,the number of partitions at the receiver can be set to 1. The secondtest measures the receive-side extra compute time available throughearly notification; the time between the first partitioned being flaggedas arrived and the final partition being flagged. Also measured in thistest is communication time as perceived by the receiver (the time fromwhen the last thread on the sender-side joins the communication to thecommunication being complete, on the receiver process).For these experiments, we used a cluster, Mutrino, that is a testbedfor the Trinity supercomputer. These experiments use the Haswellpartition of this cluster. This cluster is a Cray XC40 with 16 core XeonE5-2698v3 processors running at 2.3 GHz over an Aries interconnect.Each test was run in the MPI threading mode required by the operationsperformed with the best performance (i.e. single send is run not runin MPI_THREAD_MULTIPLE mode). Each test was run 10 times (torandomize allocated nodes) for 100 iterations with a dedicated nodefor each process, unless otherwise noted. For the send-side results, thereare additional baselines of multi-send (replacing partitioned communication with individual sends and receives) and single send (where thecommunication happens after the threads converge). All of these testsuse a thread per core (in this case 64) each responsible for a singlepartition (a total of 64 partitions). 4.2. Factors in assessing partitioned communication performance

Partitioned communication provides several performance benefitsover traditional MPI point-to-point communications in that it allowsearly data movement before an entire buffer is ready. This motivates atesting environment which allows for typical system noise that causesslight variation in MPI process loop completion times. This manifestsas a range of arrival times to any given synchronization point inthe application code. Typically such points occur as communicationcompletion events, either for collective operations or for point-to-pointcommunication. For a typical system, this variation is in the low singledigit range, with 4% representing a reasonable target in this range [14].Applications can be impacted with larger amounts of noise, especiallythose with unbalanced loads and resource contention. We measuredlarger amounts of noise, 10% in this paper, to explore the range of realistic noise levels. Partitioned communication can take advantage of thetime variance between different thread compute completion by sendingdata as soon as it becomes available from the threads that first completethe computational task. This ‘‘early-bird’’ communication [1] enablesoverlapping of data transmission from the completed portions of abuffer with computation that is still occurring for incomplete portionsof a data buffer. Therefore, the analysis of partitioned communicationmust include an evaluation of the overlap potential enabled by thedifferent implementation approaches. An example of the overlap beingmeasured is shown in Fig. 3.

Fig. 4. 10 ms compute 4% noise.

Fig. 5. 100 ms compute 4% noise.

Fig. 6. 10 ms compute 10% noise.

4.3. Send-side results

Figs. 4–7 show the results for the send-side experiments. There area number of different independent variables, including compute time,noise, transfer mechanism, and total buffer size. There are a coupleof general observations one can make here, including that both partitioned communication implementations perform better than single send

Fig. 7. 100 ms compute 10% noise. Table 4Delay and peak perceived BW for the RMA implementation.Compute &noise Delay Buffer size Peak perceivedbandwidth 10 ms 4% 0.4 ms 4 MiB 13372 MiB/s10 ms 10% 1 ms 8 MiB 29367 MiB/s100 ms 4% 4 ms 32 MiB 45166 MiB/s100 ms 10% 10 m 32 MiB 58484 MiB/s and multi-send. Additionally, the RMA-based implementation performsbetter than the persistent implementation. This is due to a number offactors including reduced overhead from one-sided communication anddifferences in the notification method. For the notification method, theRMA implementation relies on a small window of completion flags,in this case a single element, to provide notification reducing theamount of messages on the network. On the other hand, the persistentimplementation uses a point-to-point communication for each send-sidepartition; this requires network traffic for completion of each sendside partition regardless of the number of receive-side partitions. Thepeaks observed in Figs. 4–7 demonstrate the channel packing effect thatis the result of early-bird communication. At the point at which thepartitioned communication can send all of the data that is availableearly and then have little to no time to wait until the final laggarddata arrives, the channel is well packed, leading to peak performance.Having more data to send than can be transmitted in the early-birdphase and the laggard data leads to network having a backlog of data tosend after the laggard threads have completed. This impacts the overallperceived network bandwidth as the data transfer is dominated by thedata transmission volume lessening the perceived impact of the earlybird data transmission opportunities. One can observe that the persistent communication implementation occasionally peaks at a largermessage size than RMA, this is due to the overheads in the persistentsend versus the RMA Put, which leads to a shift in the channel packingbest performance buffer size. Ultimately with extremely large messagesizes, the partitioned communication and transitional send methodswill converge as the time to send the data dominates any opportunitiesto send early-bird data.Shown in Table 4 is noise-induced delay compared against the highest performing buffer size for the RMA implementation. This shows thatincreased delay is associated with better performance at larger totalbuffer sizes. Additionally, the amount of noise induced delay also appears to be associated with higher-peak bandwidth. This matches withexpectations as the noise induced delay provides a constant overlapwith communication. As that delay grows, more communication callscan be progressed before the last thread reaches the communication.Additionally, as the total buffer size grows, we expect the perceived bandwidth to converge back down to the measured bandwidth (assuming a constant delay) as after the peak, any extra data must be handledafter the last thread joins the communication section.We observe similar maxima for two of the tests using MPIPCL. Inthe 10 ms 4%, we observe a maxima at 16 MiB total buffer size with9058 MiB/s. Additionally, in the 10 ms 10% we observe a maximaat 16 MiB with 13546 MiB/s. These are not as high as the peaks forthe respective RMA implementation experiments. We do not observemaxima in the 100 ms. The results will eventually converge with thesingle-send results. 4.4. Receive-side results Figs. 8–11 show the results for the receive-side experiments. Theindependent variables are mostly the same, but two dependent variables are measured, communication time and extra compute time.Communication time is the time from when the first MPI_Pready callis made, until the point at which MPI_Wait returns on the receiver.Extra compute time measures from when the first partition is flagged ascomplete (via MPI_Parrived) to the time MPI_Wait returns. Thismeasures the additional time to work on the data that has arrivedearly before computation could normally begin. It is important to notethat the number of receive-side partitions is equal to the number ofsend-side partitions for these tests.We can make some general observations about this data. First isthat, for both cases, the extra compute time is often greater than theobserved communication time, particularly for the 100 ms tests. In the100 ms 4% test for example, we observe extra compute times of upto 5.37 times larger than communication time. This means that thefirst partition arrives before the last partition is sent. This is why theseresults are measured in time, rather than perceived bandwidth; thetime between the last partition to be called for MPI_Pready and firstpartition to return true for MPI_Parrived can be negative.The second observation we can make is that, as transfers becomeincreasingly larger, the extra compute time decreases for the RMAimplementation. This is because the MPI_Put calls for the data and thenotification are separate calls to the network; if all the data transfersenqueued before the notification transfers (which becomes increasinglylikely with larger buffer sizes) the data traffic may be prioritized. Byway of contrast, because the persistent implementation uses a singlepoint-to-point message, this approach avoids the ordering problem. Weobserve that the extra compute time actually increases at high messagecounts, due to the extra time spent in communication.Finally, we observe that, for smaller buffer sizes, the RMA implementation has a lower communication time than the persistentimplementation. At larger buffer sizes, this can change to where thepersistent implementation performs better. The exception to this isshown in Fig. 11 where the time that the emulated noise is large (10%of 100 ms). This contrasts with the send-side experiment where theRMA implementation is more performant in all of the experimentswe have done. The communication time results of the receive-sideexperiments can be compared to the send-side experiments as they bothmeasure the time from the last call to MPI_Pready to the MPI_Waitcall. In both of these experiments, the time is measured on the sendside to measure communication time, so the major difference in theseexperiments is how many receive-side partitions are declared. One ofthe major things that has changed (that could be the cause of thisbehavior) is the extra notification calls. In the send-side experiments,the RMA implementation used a single completion flag resulting in64 calls to MPI_Put on the data buffer, one MPI_Flush call on thedata buffer, one MPI_Put call on the completion flags buffer, and onecall to MPI_Flush on the completion flags buffer. However, in thereceive-side tests, the RMA implementation makes 64 of each of thosecalls. This could be detrimental to performance because of a significantincrease in overhead.

Fig. 8. Receive Side - 10 ms compute 4% noise.

Fig. 9. Receive Side - 100 ms compute 4% noise.

Fig. 10. Receive Side - 10 ms compute 10% noise.

4.5. Discussion

Given the results of our experiments, it is clear that both approachesare useful. However, each approach has benefits that depend on theparticular use case for the partitioned communication. The RMA implementation has better data transmission performance but obtainsthis performance by avoiding data fences that impact the ability of

Fig. 11. Receive Side - 100 ms compute 10% noise.

the MPI_Parrived function to provide fine-grain notification onpartition completion. The notification mechanism for the persistentimplementation makes it better suited when using MPI_Parrived on a large buffer transfer. This motivates a further exploration of theimpact of finer-grain arrival notifications with the RMA method. Thisshould be done in addition to further data transmission optimizationslike data and notification aggregation, full integration into an MPIlibrary, and a direct conversion from the partitioned interface intoRDMA calls.To evaluate how these results might correlate to impact on realapplications, it is important to view these results in the context of realworld application behavior. Prior work demonstrates applications, suchas LULESH (a hydrodynamics proxy application), are targeted at 50–100 ms per iteration of compute kernels [15]. Additionally, a surveyof MPI usage in applications has observed that message sizes fall intoa bi-modal distribution pattern, with most messages containing under800KiB and another set of sizes greater than 1 MiB [16]. This obviouslywill fluctuate with system and application set-up (number of cores,memory available, number of processes per node, etc.) but this givesus a reasonable idea of the potential impact on today’s applications. Inaddition, more optimization could occur during the initialization phasewith better knowledge of the network that would be possible with afull MPI library integration. This would help in negotiating the arrivalside notification to optimize for bandwidth while also allowing moreoverlapping compute time on early arriving data on the receiver. 5. Related work

Integrating threading internally in an MPI implementation has beenattempted in FG-MPI [17]. FG-MPI treats threads as the equivalent ofMPI processes. This allows for many concurrent threads and consequently creates a large amount of state for each thread/process. Theconcepts in FG-MPI were never incorporated into the MPI standard.Benchmarks for testing and profiling MPI threading [18] and RMA havebeen developed [19], but these focus on existing MPI functionality. Thegeneral concept of composing RDMA messages into a large transactionhas been explored for application in unreliable datagram networks atthe hardware level [20,21]. Similar benchmarks have also been developed for other one-sided communication APIs like OpenSHMEM [22].Commercial MPI’s such as MPI/Pro, which were designed for internalconcurrency and the option of blocking completion notification (toavoid polling), are no longer widely available [23]. Approaches for improving performance for large scale MPI jobs by dynamically buildingcommunicators and controlling thread levels in ‘‘Sessions’’ [24] havebeen adopted into MPI 4.0.

Message aggregation is a well known method for networks, having been explored in MPI RMA [25]. Aggregation methods are alsocommon with TCP/Ethernet networking. Previous work has introducedearlier versions of the partitioned communication libraries expandedand enhanced in this work [1,12].The MPI Forum has had a proposal before it to enhance support forthreads using endpoints [2], in which each thread can be assigned aunique rank in an endpoint communicator. However, endpoints neverattempted to address the underlying communication model, and theendpoints model only adds the ability to address messages to specificthreads. This work differs from previous efforts by the requirements itplaces on applications and the corresponding decrease both in resourcesneeded by MPI and in synchronization overhead achieved. 6. Conclusions

This paper has evaluated two key implementation methods forMPI partitioned communication via libraries built on top of existingMPI implementations. Overall, it was shown that there are benefitsto computation and communication overlap that occur with partitioned communication regardless of the implementation approach. Using remote-memory access (RMA), we observed additional benefitsfor data-transmission performance over the persistent-communicationbased approach, and better arrival notification and opportunity forearly computation on the buffer with persistent communication. Wealso found that partitioned communication performed best versus traditional MPI single- and multi-send methods when buffers are sufficientlylarge to take advantage of early thread arrival and data transmission. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared toinfluence the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgments 

This work was performed with partial support from the NationalScience Foundation under Grants Nos. CCF-1562306, CCF-1822191,CCF-1821431, OAC-1923980, OAC-1549812, and OAC-1925603, theU.S. Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA) under the Predictive Science Academic Alliance Program(PSAAP-III), Award DE-NA0003966, the University of Alabama at Birmingham, and the Alabama Innovation Fund.Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-mission laboratory managedand operated by National Technology and Engineering Solutions ofSandia LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell International Inc.for the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-NA0003525. This research was supported bythe Exascale Computing Project (17-SC-20-SC), a collaborative effortof the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science and the NationalNuclear Security Administration.This paper describes objective technical results and analysis. Anysubjective views or opinions that might be expressed in the paper donot necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Department of Energyor the United States Government.Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarilyreflect the views of the National Science Foundation, the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration, or theSandia National Laboratories.The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers whose feedback helped improve this paper significantly.

References [1] R.E. Grant, M.G.F. Dosanjh, M.J. Levenhagen, R. Brightwell, A. Skjellum,Finepoints: Partitioned multithreaded MPI communication, in: M. Weiland, G.Juckeland, C. Trinitis, P. Sadayappan (Eds.), High Performance Computing -34th International Conference, ISC High Performance 2019, Frankfurt/Main,Germany, June 16-20, 2019, Proceedings, in: Lecture Notes in Computer Science,vol. 11501, Springer, 2019, pp. 330–350, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-20656-7_17.[2] J. Dinan, R.E. Grant, P. Balaji, D. Goodell, D. Miller, M. Snir, R. Thakur, Enablingcommunication concurrency through flexible MPI endpoints, Int. Jour. HighPerform. Comput. Appl. 28 (4) (2014) 390–405.[3] D.E. Bernholdt, S. Boehm, G. Bosilca, M. Venkata, R.E. Grant, T. Naughton, H.Pritchard, G. Vallee, A survey of MPI usage in the U.S. Exascale ComputingProject, Concurr. Comput.: Pract. Exper. (2018) http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cpe.4851.[4] W. Schonbein, M.G. Dosanjh, R.E. Grant, P.G. Bridges, Measuring multithreadedmessage matching misery, in: M. Aldinucci, L. Padovani, M. Torquati (Eds.),Euro-Par 2018: Parallel Processing - 24th International Conference on Paralleland Distributed Computing, Turin, Italy, August 27-31, 2018, Proceedings, in:Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 11014, Springer, 2018, pp.

480–491,http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-96983-1_34.[5] MPI Forum, MPI: A Message-Passing Interface Standard 4.0., Tech. Rep., Univ.of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA, 2021.[6] B.W. Barrett, R. Brightwell, R.E. Grant, S. Hemmert, K. Pedretti, K. Wheeler,K. Underwood, R. Riesen, T. Hoefler, A.B. Maccabe, T. Hudson, The Portals 4.2Network Programming Interface, Tech. Rep., (SAND2018-12790) Sandia NationalLaboratories (SNL-NM), Albuquerque, NM (United States), 2018.[7] R. Zambre, A. Chandramowliswharan, P. Balaji, How I learned to stop worryingabout user-visible endpoints and love MPI, in: Proceedings of the 34th ACMInternational Conference on Supercomputing, 2020, pp. 1–13.[8] R. Zambre, A. Chandramowlishwaran, P. Balaji, Scalable communication endpoints for MPI+ threads applications, in: 2018 IEEE 24th InternationalConference on Parallel and Distributed Systems, ICPADS, IEEE, 2018, pp.803–812.[9] R. Grant, A. Skjellum, P.V. Bangalore, Lightweight Threading With MPIusing Persistent Communications Semantics, Tech. Rep., Sandia NationalLab.(SNL-NM), Albuquerque, NM (United States), 2015.[10] M.G.F. Dosanjh, R.E. Grant, P.G. Bridges, R. Brightwell, Re-evaluating networkonload vs. offload for the many-core era, in: IEEE Intl. Conf. on ClusterComputing, CLUSTER, IEEE, 2015, pp. 342–350.[11] W. Schonbein, S. Levy, W.P. Marts, M.G. Dosanjh, R.E. Grant, Low-cost MPImultithreaded message matching benchmarking, in: International Conference onHigh Performance Computing and Communications, HPCC, 2020, pp. 1–10.[12] P.V. Bangalore, A. Worley, D. Schafer, R.E. Grant, A. Skjellum, S. Ghafoor, Aportable implementation of partitioned point-to-point communication primitives,in: EuroMPI, 2020, pp. 1–3.[13] M. Dosanjh, R.E. Grant, Receive-Side Partitioned Communication, TechnicalReport SAND2019-11403, Sandia National Laboratories, 2019.[14] K.B. Ferreira, P. Bridges, R. Brightwell, Characterizing application sensitivityto OS interference using kernel-level noise injection, in: High PerformanceComputing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, 2008. SC 2008. InternationalConference for, IEEE, 2008, pp. 1–12.[15] E.A. León, I. Karlin, R.E. Grant, Optimizing explicit hydrodynamics for power,energy, and performance, in: 2015 IEEE International Conference on ClusterComputing, IEEE, 2015, pp. 11–21.[16] K.B. Ferreira, S. Levy, Evaluating MPI message size summary statistics, in:27th European MPI Users’ Group Meeting, EuroMPI/USA ’20, Association forComputing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2020, pp. 61–70, http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3416315.3416322.[17] H. Kamal, A. Wagner, An integrated fine-grain runtime system for MPI, Computing 96 (4) (2014) 293–309, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00607-013-0329-x.[18] R. Thakur, W. Gropp, Test suite for evaluating performance of MPI implementations that support MPI_THREAD_MULTIPLE, in: Recent Advances in ParallelVirtual Machine and Message Passing Interface, Springer, 2007, pp. 46–55.[19] M.G.F. Dosanjh, T. Groves, R.E. Grant, R. Brightwell, P.G. Bridges, RMA-MT: abenchmark suite for assessing MPI multi-threaded RMA performance, in: 16thIEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing,CCGrid, IEEE, 2016, pp. 550–559.[20] R.E. Grant, M.J. Rashti, A. Afsahi, P. Balaji, RDMA capable iWARP overdatagrams, in: IEEE Int. Parallel & Distributed Processing Symp., IPDPS, IEEE,2011, pp. 628–639.[21] M.J. Rashti, R.E. Grant, A. Afsahi, P. Balaji, iWARP redefined: Scalable connectionless communication over high-speed ethernet, in: Intl. Conf. on HighPerformance Computing, HiPC, IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–10.[22] H. Weeks, M.G.F. Dosanjh, P.G. Bridges, R.E. Grant, SHMEM-MT: A benchmark suite for assessing multi-threaded SHMEM performance, in: Workshop onOpenSHMEM and Related Technologies, Springer, 2016, pp. 227–231.

[23] R. Dimitrov, A. Skjellum, Software architecture and performance comparisonof MPI/Pro and MPICH, in: Int. Conf. Computational Science, ICCS, 2003, pp.307–315, http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/3-540-44863-2_31.[24] D. Holmes, K. Mohror, R.E. Grant, A. Skjellum, M. Schulz, W. Bland, J.M.Squyres, MPI sessions: Leveraging runtime infrastructure to increase scalabilityof applications at exascale, in: Proceedings of the 23rd European MPI Users’Group Meeting, 2016, pp. 121–129.

[25] N. Hjelm, M.G.F. Dosanjh, R.E. Grant, T. Groves, P. Bridges, D. Arnold, ImprovingMPI multi-threaded RMA communication performance, in: Proc. of the Int. Conf.on Parallel Processing, 2018, pp. 1–10.

Implementation and evaluation of MPI 4.0 partitioned communication libraries - ScienceDirect

ScienceDirect

Recommended articles

Parallel Computing Volume 108, December 2021, 102827

No articles found.

Citing articles

| Implementation and evaluation of MPI 4.0 partitioned communication libraries Matthew G.F. Soundararajan Bangalore Show more Share | e , Ryan E. Cite | Dosanjh d , Sheikh | a Worley , Andrew b Ghafoor , Anthony a, f Grant | b c Schafer , Derek , Prema c Skjellum , Purushotham V. |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parco.2021.102827 | | | | Get rights and content |

Highlights

• • •

Motivation and applications for MPI 
Partitioned communication. 
A summary of the MPI partitioned 
communication interface with code examples. 
Design and implementation of two MPI 
partitioned communication libraries. 
Evaluation and analysis of both libraries with 
custom benchmarks. 
Bandwidth and computational overlap 
assessment of partitioned communication. 
About ScienceDirect Remote access Shopping cart Advertise Contact and support Terms and conditions Privacy policy 
We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content and ads. By continuing you agree to the use of 
cookies. 
Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. or its licensors or contributors. ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V. 
ScienceDirect ® is a registered trademark of Elsevier B.V. 

• •

Abstract

Partitioned point-to-point communication primitives provide a performance-oriented mechanism to support a hybrid parallel programming model and have been included in the upcoming MPI-4.0 standard. These primitives enable an MPI library to transfer parts of the data buffer while the application provides partial

https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0167819121000752[9/29/21, 9:17:23 AM]

Implementation and evaluation of MPI 4.0 partitioned communication libraries - ScienceDirect https://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0167819121000752[9/29/21, 9:17:23 AM]

Previous article Next article contributions using multiple threads or tasks or simply pipelines the buffers sequentially. The focus of this paper is the design and implementation of a layered library that provides the functionality of these newer APIs and supports application development using these newer APIs. This library provides an opportunity to explore potential optimizations and identify further enhancements to the APIs. Initial experience in designing this library along with preliminary performance results are presented. In addition, the library is compared to initial prototype libraries that have recently become available that have been updated to the standard compliant interface. These prototype libraries were built on remote-memory-access (RMA) primitives, offering insight into different implementation strategies. In general, we observe an interesting trade-off space, with the RMA-based implementation proving more performant for send-side partitioning, with increases in perceived bandwidth 8.9x on average over a single send, compared to the persistent-based implementation, which shows improvements 4.0x on average. In comparing the two implementations, we find that the persistent-based implementation enables more overlap for receive-side partitioning up to 5.37X the RMA library’s overlap, while the RMA-based implementation provides better send-side performance of up to 70%.

Keywords

MPI; Partitioned communication; Point-to-point partitioned

View Abstract

© 2021 Published by Elsevier B.V.

