PREFACE

#### Jack Dongarra

The Message Passing Interface effort began in the summer of 1991 when a small group of researchers started discussions at a mountain retreat in Austria. Out of that discussion came a Workshop on Standards for Message Passing in a Distributed Memory Environment held on April 29-30, 1992, in Williamsburg, Virginia. At this workshop the basic features essential to a standard message passing interface were discussed, and a working group established to continue the standardization process. More formal meetings and discussions began in January 1993 and continued with meetings every six weeks with discussions via e-mail. The MPI Standard was completed in March of 1994. The MPI effort involved about 60 people from 40 organizations, mainly from the United States and Europe. Most of the major vendors of concurrent computers were involved in MPI, along with researchers from universities, government laboratories, and industry. This effort defines the syntax and semantics of a core of library routines useful to a wide range of users writing portable message-passing programs in

Fortran or C. The MPI effort was conducted in a similar spirit to the High Performance Fortran Forum (HPFF). MPI provides parallel hardware vendors with a clearly defined base set of routines that can be efficiently implemented. As a result, hardware vendors can build upon this collection of standard low-level routines to create higher level routines for the distributed-memory communication environments sup plied with their parallel machines. MPI provides a simple-to-use portable inter face for the basic user, yet is powerful enough to allow programmers to use the high-performance message-passing operations available on advanced machines. As an effort to create a &dquo;true&dquo; standard for message passing, researchers incorporated into MPI the most useful features of several systems, rather than choosing one system to adopt as a standard. Features were used from systems by IBM, Intel, nCUBE, PVM, Express, P4, and PARMACS. The message paradigm, we believe, will be attractive because of its wide portability and can be used in

communications for distributed-memory and shared-memory multiprocessors, networks ofworkstations, and any combination of these elements. The paradigm will not be made obsolete by increases in network speeds or by architectures com bining shared and distributed-memory components. As this standard is printed, we have implementations of MPI on various platforms with more expected in the months to come. MPI operated on a very tight budget (in reality, it had no budget when the first meeting was announced). ARPA and NSF have supported research at various institutions and have made a contribution toward travel for the U.S. academics. Support for several European participants was provided by ESPRIT. This issue of the Journal is also available in Postscript and HTML forms over the Internet. To retrieve the postscript file you can anonymous ftp to netlib2.cs.utk.edu; cd mpi; get mpi-report.ps. The HTML form can be found by the URL: http://www.mes.anl. gov/mpi/mpi-report/mpi-report . html. An up-to date list of errata for this document is being maintained. To receive a copy, send an e-mail message to netlib~ornl.gov with contents: send mpi-errata.ps from mpi.

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION TO MPI ’i .1 Overview and Goals

Message passing is a paradigm used widely on certain classes of parallel machines, especially those with distributed memoiy. Although there are many variations, the basic concept of processes communicating through messages is well under stood. Over the last ten years, substantial progress has been made in casting significant applications in this paradigm. Each vendor has implemented its own variant. More recently, several systems have demonstrated that a message-passing system can be efficiently and portably implemented. It is thus an appropriate time to try to define both the syntax and semantics of a core of library routines that will be useful to a wide range of users and efficiently implementable on a wide range of computers. In designing MPI we have sought to make use of the most attractive features of a number of existing message-passing systems, rather than selecting one of them and adopting it as the standard. Thus, MPI has been strongly influenced by work at the IBM T.J. Watson Research Center [1, 2], Intel’s NX/2 [23], Express [22], nCUBE’s Vertex [2I], p4 [7, 6], and PARMACS [5, 8]. Other important contributions have come from Zipcode [24, 25], Chimp [14, 15], PVM [4, 11~, Chameleon [19], and PICL [ 18] . The MPI standardization effort involved about 60 people from 40 organiza tions mainly from the United States and Europe. Most of the major vendors of concurrent computers were involved in MPI, along with researchers from uni versities, government laboratories, and industry. The standardization process began with the Workshop on Standards for Message Passing in a Distributed Memory Environment, sponsored by the Center for Research on Parallel Com puting, held April 29-30, 1992, in Wilfiamsburg, Virginia [29]. At this work shop the basic features essential to a standard message-passing interface were discussed, and a working group established to continue the standardization pro cess.

A preliminary draft proposal, known as MPI1, was put forward by Dongarra, Hempel, Hey, and Walker in November 1992, and a revised version was com pleted in February 1993 [12]. MPII embodied the main features that were identified at the Williamsburg workshop as being necessary in a message-passing standard. Since MPII was primarily intended to promote discussion and &dquo;get the ball rolling,&dquo; it focused mainly on point-to-point communications. MPI1 brought to the forefront a number of important standardization issues, but did not include any collective communication routines and was not thread-safe. In November 1992, a meeting of the MPI working group was held in Min neapolis, at which it was decided to place the standardization process on a more formal footing, and to generally adopt the procedures and organization of the

High Performance Fortran Forum. Subcommittees were formed for the major component areas of the standard, and an e-mail discussion service established for each. In addition, the goal of producing a draft MPI standard by the Fall of 1993 was set. To achieve this goal the MPI working group met every 6 weeks for two days throughout the first 9 months of 1993, and presented the draft MPI standard at the Supercomputing 93 conference in November 1993. These meetings and the e-mail discussion together constituted the MPI Forum, membership of which has been open to all members of the high performance computing community. The main advantages of establishing a message-passing standard are porta bility and ease-of-use. In a distributed memory communication environment in which the higher level routines and/or abstractions are built upon lower level message-passing routines the benefits of standardization are particularly appar ent. Furthermore, the definition of a message-passing standard, such as that proposed here, provides vendors with a clearly defined base set of routines that they can implement efficiently, or in some cases provide hardware support for, thereby enhancing scalability. The goal of the Message Passing Interface simply stated is to develop a widely used standard for writing message-passing programs. As such the in terface should establish a practical, portable, efficient, and flexible standard for

message passing. A complete list of goals follows.

, o Design an application programming interface (not necessarily for compilers or a system implementation library). . Allow efficient communication: Avoid memory-to-memory copying and allow overlap of computation and communication and offload to commu nication co-processor, where available. * Allow for implementations that can be used in a heterogeneous environ ment. _ . Allow convenient C and Fortran 77 bindings for the interface. 9 Assume a reliable communication interface: the user need not cope with communication failures. Such failures are dealt with by the underlying communication subsystem.

~ Define an interface that is not too different from current practice, such

as PVM, NX, Express, p4, etc., and provides extensions that allow greater flexibility. . Define an interface that can be implemented on many vendors’ platforms, with no significant changes in the underlying communication and system software.

### . Semantics of the interface should be language independent. w The interface should be designed to allow for thread-safety. z

1.2 Who Should Use This Standard? This standard is intended for use by all those who want to write portable message passing programs in Fortran 77 and C. This includes individual application pro grammers, developers of software designed to run on parallel machines, and creators of environments and tools. In order to be attractive to this wide au dience, the standard must provide a simple, easy-to-use interface for the basic user while not semantically precluding the high-performance message-passing operations available on advanced machines.

1.3 What Platforms Are Targets For Implementation? The attractiveness of the message-passing paradigm at least partially stems from its wide portability. Programs expressed this way may run on distributed-memory multiprocessors, networks of workstations, and combinations of all of these. In addition, shared-memory implementations are possible. The paradigm will not be made obsolete by architectures combining the shared- and distributed memory views, or by increases in network speeds. It thus should be both possible and useful to implement this standard on a great variety of machines, including those &dquo;machines&dquo; consisting of collections of other machines, parallel or not, connected by a communication network. The interface is suitable for use by fully general MIMD programs, as well as those written in the more restricted style of SPMD. Although no explicit support for threads is provided, the interface has been designed so as not to prejudice their use. With this version of MPI no support is provided for dynamic spawning of tasks. MPI provides many features intended to improve performance on scalable parallel computers with specialized interprocessor communication hardware. Thus, we expect that native, high-performance implementations of MPI will be provided on such machines. At the same time, implementations of MPI on top of standard Unix interprocessor communication protocols will provide portabil ity to workstation clusters and heterogenous networks of workstations. Several proprietary, native implementations of MPI, and a public domain, portable im plementation of MPI are in progress at the time of this writing [17, 13].

1.4 What Is Included in the Standard? The standard includes: . Point-to-point communication

w Collective operations . Process groups . Communication contexts . Process topologies . Bindings for Fortran 77 and C ~ Environmental Management and inquiry ~ Profiling interface

1.5 What Is Not Included in the Standard?

The standard does not specify: . Explicit shared-memory operations . Operations that require more operating system support than is currently standard; for example, interrupt-driven receives, remote execution, or ac

tive messages 
. Program construction tools 
. Debugging facilities 
. Explicit support for threads 
. Support for task management 
. I/O functions - 
There are many features that have been considered and not included in this 
standard. This happened for a number of reasons, one of which is the time 
constraint that was self-imposed in finishing the standard. Features that are 
not included can always be offered as extensions by specific implementations. 
Perhaps future versions of MPI will address some of these issues. 
1.S Organization of This Document 
The following is a list of the remaining chapters in this document, along with a 
brief description of each. 
. Chapter 2, MPI Terms and Conventions, explains notational terms and 
conventions used throughout the MPI document. 
~ Chapter 3, Point-to-Point Communication, defines the basic, pairwise com 

munication subset of MPI. send and .receive are found here, along with many associated functions designed to make basic communication powerful and efficient. . Chapter 4, Collective Communication, defines process-group collective communication operations. Well-known examples of this are barrier and broadcast over a group of processes (not necessarily all the processes).

w Chapter 5, Groups, Contexts, and Communicators, shows how groups of processes are formed and manipulated, how unique communication con texts are obtained, and how the two are bound together into a communicator. . Chapter 6, Process Topologies, explains a set of utility functions meant to assist in the mapping of process groups (a linearly ordered set) to richer

topological structures such as multi-dimensional grids. . Chapter 7, MPI Environmental Management, explains how the program mer can manage and make inquiries of the current MPI environment. These functions are needed for the writing of correct, robust programs, and are especially important for the construction of highly portable message passing programs. . Chapter 8, Profiling lnterface, explains a simple name-shifting convention that any MPI implementation must support. One motivation for this is the ability to put performance profiling calls into MPI without the need for access to the MPI source code. The name shift is merely an interface; it says nothing about how the actual profiling should be done and in fact, the name shift can be useful for other purposes. . Annex A, Language Binding, gives specific syntax in Fortran 77 and C, for all MPI functions, constants, and types. ~ The MPI Function Index is a simple index showing the location of the precise definition of each MPI function, together with both C and Fortran

### bindings.

CHAPTER 2

MPI TERMS AND CONVENTIONS

This chapter explains notational terms and conventions used throughout the MPI document, some of the choices that have been made, and the rationale behind those choices.

2.1 Document Notation Ratioyaale. Throughout this document, the rationale for the design choices made in the interface specification is set off in this format. Some readers may wish to skip these sections, while readers interested in interface design may want to read them carefully. (End of rationale.) Advice to users. Throughout this document, material that speaks to users and illustrates usage is set off in this format. Some readers may wish to skip these sections, while readers interested in programming in MPI may want to read them carefully. (End of advice to users.) Advice to implementors.. Throughout this document, material that is primar ily commentary to implementors is set off in this format. Some readers may wish to skip these sections, while readers interested in MPI implemen tations may want to read them carefully. (End of advice to implemen.tors.)

2.2 Procedure Specification 
MPI procedures are specified using a language-independent notation. The ar 
guments of procedure calls are marked as IN, OUT or INOUT. The meanings of 
these are: 

### 9 the call uses but does not update an argument marked IN, ~ the call may update an argument marked OUT,

.

w the call both uses and updates an argument marked INOUT. 
There is one special case-if an argument is a handle to an opaque object 
(these terms are defined in Section 2.4.1), and the object is updated by the 
procedure call, then the argument is marked OUT. It is marked this way even 

-

though the handle itself is not modified-we use the OUT attribute to denote that what the handle references is updated. The definition of MPI tries to avoid, to the largest possible extent, the use of INOUT arguments, because such use is error-prone, especially for scalar arguments. A common occurrence for MPI functions is an argument that is used as IN by some processes and OUT by other processes. Such argument is, syntactically, an INOUT argument and is marked as such, although, semantically, it is not used in one call both for input and for output. Another frequent situation arises when an argument value is needed only by a subset of the processes. When an argument is not significant at a process then an arbitrary value can be passed as argument. Unless specified otherwise, an argument of type OUT or type INOUT cannot be aliased with any other argument passed to an MPI procedure. An example of argument aliasing in C appears below. If we define a C procedure like this,

void copyIntBuffer( int *pin, int *pout, int len ) { int i; for (i=0; i«en; ++i) *pout++ = *pin++;

’I

then a call to it in the following code fragment has aliased arguments. 
int a[10]; 
copyIntBuffer( a, a+3, 7); 

Although the C language allows this, such usage of MPI procedures is forbidden unless otherwise specified. Note that Fortran prohibits aliasing of arguments. All MPI functions are first specified in the language-independent notation. Immediately below this, the ANSI C version of the function is shown, and below this, a version of the same function in Fortran 77.

2.3 Semantic Terms When discussing MPI procedures the following semantic terms are used. The first two are usually applied to communication operations.

nonblocking If the procedure may return before the operation completes, and before the user is allowed to re-use resources (such as buffers) specified in the call. blocking If return from the procedure indicates the user is allowed to re-use resources specified in the call.

local If completion of the procedure depends only on the local executing pro cess. Such an operation does not require communication with another user process. non-local If completion of the operation may require the execution of some

--

### MPI procedure on another process. Such an operation may require com

## munication occurring with another user process. collective If all processes in a process group need to invoke the procedure.

2.4 Data Types 
2.4.’t OPAQUE OBJECTS 

MPI manages system memory that is used for buffering messages and for storing internal representations of various MPI objects such as groups, communicators, datatypes, etc. This memory is not directly accessible to the user, and objects stored there are opaque: their size and shape is not visible to the user. Opaque objects are accessed via handles, which exist in user space. MPI procedures that operate on opaque objects are passed handle arguments to access these objects. In addition to their use by MPI calls for object access, handles can participate in assignment and comparisons. In Fortran, all handles have type INTEGER. In C, a different handle type is defined for each category of objects. These should be types that support assignment and equality operators. In Fortran, the handle can be an index to a table of opaque objects in system table; in C it can be such index or a pointer to the object. More bizarre possibilities exist. Opaque objects are allocated and deallocated by calls that are specific to each object type. These are listed in the sections where the objects are described. The calls accept a handle argument of matching type. In an allocate call this is an OUT argument that returns a valid reference to the object. In a call to deallocate this is an INOUT argument which returns with an &dquo;invalid handle&dquo; value. MP) provides an &dquo;invalid handle&dquo; constant for each object type. Comparisons to this constant are used to test for validity of the handle. A call to deallocate invalidates the handle and marks the object for deallo cation. The object is not accessible to the user after the call. However, MPI need not deallocate the object immediately. Any operation pending (at the time of the deallocate) that involves this object will complete normally; the object will be deallocated afterwards. An opaque object and its handle are significant only at the process where the object was created, and cannot be transferred to another process. MPI provides certain predefined opaque objects and predefined, static han dles to these objects. Such objects may not be destroyed.

Rationale. This design hides the internal representation used for MPI data structures, thus allowing similar calls in C and Fortran. It also avoids conflicts with the typing rules in these languages, and easily allows future extensions of functionality. The mechanism for opaque objects used here loosely follows the POSIX Fortran binding standard. The explicit separating of handles in user space, objects in system space, allows space-reclaiming, deallocation calls to be made at appropriate points

in the user program. If the opaque objects were in user space, one would have to be very careful not to go out of scope before any pending operation requiring that object completed. The specified design allows an object to be marked for deallocation, the user program can then go out of scope, and the object itself still persists until any pending operations are complete. The requirement that handles support assignment/ comparison is made since such operations are common. This restricts the domain of possible implementations. The alternative would have been to allow handles to have been an arbitrary, opaque type. This would force the introduction of routines to do assignment and comparison, adding complexity, and was therefore ruled out. (End of rationale.)

Advice to users. A user may accidentally create a dangling reference by assigning to a handle the value of another handle, and then deallocating the object associated with these handles. Conversely, if a handle variable is deallocated before the associated object is freed, then the object becomes inaccessible (this may occur, for example, if the handle is a local variable within a subroutine, and the subroutine is exited before the associated object is deallocated). It is the user’s responsibility to avoid adding or

.

deleting references to opaque objects, except as a result of calls that allocate or deallocate such objects. {End of advice to users.)

Advice to impúmœntoTS. The intended semantics of opaque objects is that each opaque object is separate from each other; each call to allocate such an object copies all the information required for the object. Implementations may avoid excessive copying by substituting referencing for copying. For example, a derived datatype may contain references to its components, rather then copies of its components; a call to MPI_COMM_GROUP may return a reference to the group associated with the communicator, rather than a copy of this group. In such cases, the implementation must maintain reference counts, and allocate and deallocate objects such that the visible effect is as if the objects were copied. (End of advice to implementors.)

2.4.2 ARRAY ARGUMENTS An MPI call may need an argument that is an array of opaque objects, or an array of handles. The array-of-handles is a regular array with entries that are handles to objects of the same type in consecutive locations in the array. Whenever such an array is used, an additional len argument is required to indicate the number of valid entries (unless this number can be derived otherwise). The valid entries are at the beginning of the array; len indicates how many of them there are, and need not be the entire size of the array. The same approach is followed for other array arguments.

-

2.4.3 STATE

’

MPI procedures use at various places arguments with state types. The values of such data type are all identified by names, and no operation is defined on them.

### For example, the MPI-ERRHANDLER-SET routine has a state type argument with values MPI-ERRORS-ARE-FATAL, MPI_ERRORS_RETURN, etc.

2.4.4 NAMED CONSTANTS

MPl procedures sometimes assign a special meaning to a special value of a basic type argument; e.g. tag is an integer-valued argument of point-to-point commu nication operations, with a special wild-card value, MP1~4NY_TAG. Such arguments will have a range of regular values, which is a proper subrange of the range of values of the corresponding basic type; special values (such as MPI~4NY_TAG) will be outside the regular range. The range of regular values can be queried using environmental inquiry functions (Chapter 7).

2.4.5 CHOICE MPI functions sometimes use arguments with a choice (or union) data type. Dis tinct calls to the same routine may pass by reference actual arguments of different types. The mechanism for providing such arguments will differ from language to language. For Fortran, the document uses to represent a choice variable, for C, we use (void ’~).

2.4.6 ADDRESSES

Some MPI procedures use address arguments that represent an absolute address in the calling program. The datatype of such an argument is an integer of the size needed to hold any valid address in the execution environment.

2.5 Language Binding This section defines the rules for MPI language binding in general and for For tran 77 and ANSI C in particular. Defined here are various object representa tions, as well as the naming conventions used for expressing this standard. The actual calling sequences are defined elsewhere. It is expected that any Fortran 90 and C++ implementations use the Fortran 77 and ANSI C bindings, respectively. Although we consider it premature to define other bindings to Fortran 90 and C++, the current bindings are designed to encourage, rather than discourage, experimentation with better bindings that might be adopted later. Since the word PARAMETER is a keyword in the Fortran language, we use the word &dquo;argument&dquo; to denote the arguments to a subroutine. These are normally referred to as parameters in C, however, we expect that C programmers will understand the word &dquo;argument&dquo; (which has no specific meaning in C), thus allowing us to avoid unnecessary confusion for Fortran programmers.

double precision a integer b

call MPI_send(a,...) call MPI_send(b,...)

Fig. 2.1 An example of calling a routine with mismatched formal and actual arguments.

There are several important language binding issues not addressed by this standard. This standard does not discuss the interoperability of message passing between languages. It is fully expected that many implementations will have such features, and that such features are a sign of the quality of the implementation.

2.5.1 FORTRAN 77 BINDING ISSUES

All MPI names have an MPI- prefix, and all characters are capitals. Programs must 
not declare variables or functions with names beginning with the prefix, MPI-. 
This is mandated to avoid possible name collisions. 
All MPI Fortran subroutines have a return code in the last argument. A few 
MPI operations are functions, which do not have the return code argument. The 
return code value for successful completion is MPI-SUCCESS. Other error codes 
are implementation dependent; see Chapter 7. 
Handles are represented in Fortran as INTEGERS. Binary-valued variables are 
of type LOGICAL. 
Array arguments are indexed from one. 
Unless explicitly stated, the MPI F77 binding is consistent with ANSI standard 
Fortran 77. There are several points where this standard diverges from the ANSI 
Fortran 77 standard. These exceptions are consistent with common practice in 

the Fortran community. In particular: ~ MPI identifiers are limited to thirty, not six, significant characters. . MPI identifiers may contain underscores after the first character. . An MPI subroutine with a choice argument may be called with different argument types. An example is shown in Figure 2.1. This violates the

letter of the Fortran standard, but such a violation is common practice. An alternative would be to have a separate version of MPI_SEND for each data type. . Although not required, it is strongly suggested that named MPI constants (PARAMETERS) be provided in an include file, called mpi~.h. On systems that do not support include files, the implementation should specify the values of named constants. . Vendors are encouraged to provide type declarations in the mpif.h file on Fortran systems that support user-defined types. One should define, if possible, the type MPLADDRESS, which is an INTEGER of the size needed

-

to hold an address in the execution environment. On systems where type &dquo; definition is not supported, it is up to the user to use an INTEGER of the right kind to represent addresses (i.e., INTEGER*4 on a 32 bit machine, INTEGER*8 on a 64 bit machine, etc. ) .

2.5.2 C BINDIAIG ISSUES We use the ANSI C declaration format. All MPI names have an MPL prefix, de fined constants are in all capital letters, and defined types and functions have one capital letter after the prefix. Programs must not declare variables or functions with names beginning with the prefix, MPI-. This is mandated to avoid possible name collisions. The definition of named constants, function prototypes, and type definitions

must be supplied in an include file mpi.h. 
Almost all C functions return an error code. The successful return code will 
be MPI-SUCCESS, but failure return codes are implementation dependent. A few 
C functions do not return values, so that they can be implemented as macros. 
Type declarations are provided for handles to each category of opaque ob 
jects. Either a pointer- or an integer type is used. 
Array arguments are indexed from zero. 
Logical flags are integers with value 0 meaning &dquo;false&dquo; and a non-zero value 
meaning &dquo;true.&dquo; 
Choice arguments are pointers of type void*. 
Address arguments are of MPI defined type MPl~4int. This is defined to be 
an int of the size needed to hold any valid address on the target architecture. 

2.6 Processes An MPI program consists of autonomous processes, executing their own code, in an MIMD style. The codes executed by each process need not be identical.

The processes communicate via calls to MPI communication primitives. Typi cally, each process executes in its own address space, although shared-memory implementations of MPI are possible. This document specifies the behavior of a parallel program assuming that only MPI calls are used for communication. The interaction of an MPI program with other possible means of communication (e.g., shared memory) is not specified. MPI does not specify the execution model for each process. A process can be sequential, or can be multi-threaded, with threads possibly executing con currently. Care has been taken to make MPI &dquo;thread-safe,&dquo; by avoiding the use of implicit state. The desired interaction of MPI with threads is that concurrent threads be all allowed to execute MPI calls, and calls be reentrant; a blocking MPI call blocks only the invoking thread, allowing the scheduling of another thread.

### MPI does not provide mechanisms to specify the initial allocation of processes to an MPI computation and their binding to physical processors. It is expected

that vendors will provide mechanisms to do so either at load time or at run time.

Such mechanisms will allow the specification of the initial number of required processes, the code to be executed by each initial process, and the allocation of processes to processors. Also, the current proposal does not provide for dynamic creation or deletion of processes during program execution (the total number of processes is fixed), although it is intended to be consistent with such extensions.

Finally, we always identify processes according to their relative rank in a group, that is, consecutive integers in the range o..gzoupsize-1.

2.7 Error Handling MPI provides the user with reliable message transmission. A message sent is always received correctly, and the user does not need to check for transmission errors, time-outs, or other error conditions. In other words, MPI does not pro vide mechanisms for dealing with failures in the communication system. If the MPI implementation is built on an unreliable underlying mechanism, then it is the job of the implementor of the MPI subsystem to insulate the user from this unreliability, or to reflect unrecoverable errors as failures. Whenever possible, such failures will be reflected as errors in the relevant communication call. Sim ilarly, MPI itself provides no mechanisms for handling processor failures. The error handling facilities described in Section 7.2 can be used to restrict the scope of an unrecoverable error, or design error recovery at the application level. Of course, MPI programs may still be erroneous. A program error can occur when an MPI call is called with an incorrect argument (non-existing destination in a send operation, buffer too small in a receive operation, etc.). This type of error would occur in any implementation. In addition, a resource error may occur when a program exceeds the amount of available system resources (number of pending messages, system buffers, etc.). The occurrence of this type of error depends on the amount of available resources in the system and the resource allocation mechanism used; this may differ from system to system. A high-quality implementation will provide generous limits on the important resources so as to alleviate the portability problem this represents. Almost all MPI calls return a code that indicates successful completion of the operation. Whenever possible, MPI calls return an error code, if an error occurred during the call. By default, an error detected during the execution of the MPI library causes the parallel computation to abort. However, MPI provides mechanisms for users to change this default and to handle recoverable errors. The user may specify that no error is fatal, and handle error codes returned by MPI calls by himself or herself. Also, the user may provide his or her own error-handling routines, which will be invoked whenever an MPI call returns abnormally. The MPI error handling facilities are described in Section 7.2. Several factors limit the ability of MPI calls to return with meaningful error codes when an error occurs. MPI may not be able to detect some errors; other errors may be too expensive to detect in normal execution mode; finally some

-

errors may be &dquo;catastrophic&dquo; and may prevent MPI from returning control to the caller in a consistent state. Another subtle issue arises because of the nature of asynchronous commu- .

nications: MPI calls may initiate operations that continue asynchronously after the call returned. Thus, the operation may return with a code indicating suc cessful completion, yet later cause an error exception to be raised. If there is a subsequent call that relates to the same operation (e.g., a call that verifies that an asynchronous operation has completed) then the error argument associated with this call will be used to indicate the nature of the error. In a few cases, the error may occur after all calls that relate to the operation have completed, so that no error value can be used to indicate the nature of the error (e.g., an error in a send with the ready mode). Such an error must be treated as fatal, since information cannot be returned for the user to recover from it. , This document does not specify the state of a computation after an erroneous MPI call has occurred. The desired behavior is that a relevant error code be returned, and the effect of the error be localized to the greatest possible extent. E.g., it is highly desirable that an erroneous receive call will not cause any part of the receiver’s memory to be overwritten, beyond the area specified for receiving the message. Implementations may go beyond this document in supporting in a mean ingful manner MPI calls that are defined here to be erroneous. For example, M PI specifies strict type matching rules between matching send and receive op erations : it is erroneous to send a floating point variable and receive an integer. Implementations may go beyond these type matching rules, and provide auto matic type conversion in such situations. It will be helpful to generate warnings for such nonconforming behavior.

2.8 Implementation Issues There are a number of areas where an MPI implementation may interact with the operating environment and system. While MPI does not mandate that any services (such as I/O or signal handling) be provided, it does strongly suggest the behavior to be provided if those services are available. This is an important point in achieving portability across platforms that provide the same set of services.

2.8.’I INDEPENDENCE OF BASIC RUNTIME ROUTINES

MPI programs require that library routines that are part of the basic language environment (such as date and write in Fortran and printf and malloc in ANSI C) and are executed after MPI-INIT and before MPI-FINALIZE operate independently and that their completion. is independent of the action of other processes in an

MPI program. Note that this in no way prevents the creation of library routines that provide parallel services whose operation is collective. However, the following program

is expected to complete in an ANSI C environment regardless of the size of

##### MPI-COMM-WORLD (assuming that I/O is available at the executing nodes).

int rank; 
MPI_Init( argc, argv ); 
MPI_Comm_rank MPI_COMM_WORLD, &rank ); 
if (rank == 0) printf( &dquo;Starting programBn&dquo; ); 
MPI_Finalize(); 

The corresponding Fortran 77 program is also expected to complete. An example of what is not required is any particular ordering of the action of these routines when called by several tasks. For example, MPI makes neither requirements nor recommendations for the output from the following program (again assuming that I/O is available at the executing nodes).

MPI_Gomm_ran~( ( MPI_COMM_WORLD, &rank ); print ( &dquo;Output from task rank °/bdBn&dquo; , rank _

In addition, calls that fail because of resource exhaustion or other error are not considered a violation of the requirements here (however, they are required to complete, just not to complete successfully).

2.8.2 INTERACTION WITH SIGNALS IN POSIX MPI does not specify either the interaction of processes with signals, in a UNIX environment, or with other events that do not relate to MPI communication.

That is, signals are not significant from the viewpoint of MPI, and implementors should attempt to implement MPI so that signals are transparent: an MPI call suspended by a signal should resume and complete after the signal is handled. Generally, the state of a computation that is visible or significant from the view point of MPI should only be affected by MPI calls. The intent of MP! to be thread and signal safe has a number of subtle effects. For example, on Unix systems, a catchable signal such as SIGALRM (an alarm signal) must not cause an MPI routine to behave differently than it would have in the absence of the signal. Of course, if the signal handler issues MPI calls or changes the environment in which the MPI routine is operating (for example, consuming all available memory space), the MPI routine should behave as ap propriate for that situation (in particular, in this case, the behavior should be the same as for a multi-threaded MPI implementation). A second effect is that a signal handler that performs MPI calls must not interfere with the operation of MPI. For example, an MPI receive of any type that occurs within a signal handler must not cause erroneous behavior by the MPI implementation. Note that an implementation is permitted to prohibit the use of MPI calls from within a signal handler, and is not required to detect such use. It is highly desirable that MPI not use SIGALRM, SIGFPE, or SIGIO. An imple mentation is required to clearly document all of the signals that the MPI i~nple mentation uses; a good place for this information is a Unix ’man’ page on MPI.

--

CHAPTER 3

POINT-TO-POINT COMMUNICATION

3.1 Introduction Sending and receiving of messages by processes is the basic MPI communication mechanism. The basic point-to-point communication operations are send and receive. Their use is illustrated in the example below.

#include &dquo;mpi.h&dquo;

&dquo;

main( argc, argv )

int argc; char **argv; {

char message[20]; 
int myrank; 
MPI_Status status; 
MPI-Init( &argc, &argv ); 
MPI_Comm_rank( MPI_COMM_WORLD, &myrank ); 
if (myrank == 0) /* code for process zero */ 
{ 

strcpy(message,&dquo;Hello, there&dquo;);

MPI_Send(message, strlen(message), MP1_CHAR, 1, 99, MPI_COMM_WORLD);

}

else /* code for process one */

{

MPI_Recv(message, 20, MPI_CHAR, 0, 99, MPI_COMM_WORLD, &status);

printf(&dquo;received °/,s : Bn&dquo; , message);

}

MPI_Finalize{);

I

In this example, process zero (my rank = 0) sends a message to process one using the send operation MP~_SE~ND. The operation specifies a send buffer in the sender memory from which the message data is taken. In the example above, the send buffer consists of the storage containing the variable message in the

memory of process zero. The location, size, and type of the send buffer are specified by the first three parameters of the send operation. The message sent will contain the 13 characters of this variable. In addition, the send operation associates an envelope with the message. This envelope specifies the message destination and contains distinguishing information that can be used by the receive operation to select a particular message. The last three parameters of the send operation specify the envelope for the message sent.

Process one (myrank = 1) receives this message with the receive operation MPI_RECV. The message to be received is selected according to the value of its envelope, and the message data is stored into the receive buffer. In the example above, the receive buffer consists of the storage containing the string message in the memory of process one. The first three parameters of the receive operation specify the location, size, and type of the receive buffer. The next three parameters are used for selecting the incoming message. The last parameter is used to return information on the message just received. The next sections describe the blocking send and receive operations. We dis cuss send, receive, blocking communication semantics, type matching require ments, type conversion in heterogeneous environments, and more general com munication modes. Nonblocking communication is addressed next, followed by channel-like constructs and send-receive operations. We then consider general datatypes that allow one to transfer efficiently heterogeneous and noncontiguous data. We conclude with the description of calls for explicit packing and unpacking of messages.

3.2 Blocking Send and Receive Operations 
3.2.1 BLOCKING SEND 

The syntax of the blocking send operation is given below. MPI-SEND(buf, count, datatype, dest, tag, comm) IN buf initial address of send buffer (choice) IN count number of elements in send buffer (nonnegative integer) IN datatype datatype of each send buffer element (handle) . IN dest rank of destination (integer) IN tag message tag (integer) IN Comm communicator (handle) ’

int MPI~end(void* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int dest, int tag, 
_ MPI_Comm comm) 
MPI-gEND(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, IERROR) 
 BUF(*) 
INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, IERROR 
The blocking semantics of this call are described in Section 3.4. 

~ .

3.2.2 MESSAGE DATA

’

The send buffer specified by the MPI_SEND operation consists of count succes sive entries of the type indicated by datatype, starting with the entry at address buf. Note that we specify the message length in terms of number of elements, not number of bytes. The former is machine independent and closer to the application level. The data part of the message consists of a sequence of count values, each of the type indicated by datatype. count may be zero, in which case the data part of the message is empty. The basic datatypes that can be specified for message data

’

values correspond to the basic datatypes of the host language. Possible values of this argument for Fortran and the corresponding Fortran types are listed below.

Possible values for this argument for C and the corresponding C types are listed below.

The datatypes MPI_BYTE and MPl_PACI~ED do not correspond to a Fortran or C datatype. A value of type MPI_BYTE consists of a byte (8 binary digits). A byte is uninterpreted and is different from a character. Different machines may have different representations for characters, or may use more than one byte to

represent characters. On the other hand, a byte has the same binary value on all machines. The use of the type MPI_PACKED is explained in Section 3.13. MPI requires support of the datatypes listed above, which match the basic datatypes of Fortran 77 and ANSI C. Additional M PI datatypes should be provided if the host language has additional data types: MP1_LONG_LONG_INT, for (64 bit) C integers declared to be of type loruglong int; MPI_DUUBLE_COMPLEX for double precision complex in Fortran declared to be of type DOUBLE COMPLEX; MPI_REAL2, MPI_REAL4 and MPI_REAL$ for Fortran reals, declared to be of type REAL*2, REAL*4, and REAL~8, respectively; MPI_INTEGER1 MPI_INTEGER2 and MPI_INTEGER4 for Fortran integers, declared to be of type INTEGER~1, INTEGER*2, and INTEGER-4, respectively; etc.

Rationale. One goal of the design is to allow for MPI to be implemented as a library, with no need for additional preprocessing or compilation. Thus, one cannot assume that a communication call has information on the datatype of variables in the communication buffer; this information must be supplied by an explicit argument. The need for such datalype information will become clear in Section 3.3.2. (send o, f rc~tir~nale.)

3.2.3 MESSAGE ENVELOPE

In addition to the data part, messages carry information that can be used to distinguish messages and selectively receive them. This information consists of a fixed number of fields, which we collectively call the message envelope. These fields are

source destination tag communicator The message source is implicitly determined by the identity of the message sender. The other fields are specified by arguments in the send operation. The message destination is specified by the dest argument. The integer-valued message tag is specified by the tag argument. This integer can be used by the program to distinguish different types of messages. The range of valid tag values is 0,... ,UB, where the value of UB is implementation dependent. It can be found by querying the value of the attribute MPI_TAG_UB, as described in Chapter 7. MPI requires that UB be no less than 32767. The comm argument specifies the communicator that is used for the send operation. Communicators are explained in Chapter 5; below is a brief summary of their usage. A communicator specifies the communication context for a communication operation. Each communication context provides a separate &dquo;communication universe:&dquo; messages are always received within the context they were sent, and messages sent in different contexts do not interfere.

--

The communicator also specifies the set of processes that share this commu nication context. This process group is ordered and processes are identified by their rank within this group. Thus, the range ofvalid values for dest is 0, ... , n-1, where n is the number of processes in the group. (If the communicator is an inter-communicator, then destinations are identified by their rank in the remote group. See Chapter 5.) A predefined communicator MPI_COMM_WORLD is provided by MPI. It allows communication with all processes that are accessible after MPI initialization and processes are identified by their rank in the group of MPI-COMM-WORLD.

Advice to users. Users that are comfortable with the notion of a flat name space for processes, and a single communication context, as offered by most existing communication libraries, need only use the predefined variable MPLCOtvXvLWORLD as the comm argument. This will allow communication with all the processes available at initialization time. Users may define new communicators, as explained in Chapter 5. Com municators provide an important encapsulation mechanism for libraries and modules. They allow modules to have their own disjoint communica tion universe and their own process numbering scheme. (End of advice to

users. )

Advice to implementors. The message envelope would normally be en coded by a fixed-length message header. However, the actual encoding is implementation dependent. Some of the information (e.g., source or destination) may be implicit, and need not be explicitly carried by mes sages. Also, processes may be identified by relative ranks, or absolute ids,

### etc. (End of advice to amplem.entors.)

3.2.4 BLOCKING RECEIVE The syntax of the blocking receive operation is given below.

MPI_RECV (buf, count, datatype, source, tag, comm, status) OUT buf initial address of receive buffer (choice) IN count number of elements in receive buffer (integer) IN datatype datatype of each receive buffer element (handle) IN source rank of source (integer) EM tag message tag (integer) IN comm communicator (handle) OUT Status status object (Status)

int MPI~i,ecv(void* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int source, 
int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI-Status *status) 
MPI-RECV(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, SOURCE, TAG, COMM, STATUS, IERROR) 
 BUF(*) 

INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, SOURCE, TAG, COMM, STATUSCMPI_STATUS_SIZE), I IERROR

The blocking semantics of this call are described in Section 3.4.

’

The receive buffer consists of the storage containing count consecutive ele ments of the type specified by datatype, starting at address buf. The length of the received message must be less than or equal to the length of the receive buffer. An overflow error occurs if all incoming data does not fit, without truncation, into the receive buffer. If a message that is shorter than the receive buffer arrives, then only those locations corresponding to the (shorter) message are modified. Advice to users. The MPI-PROBE function described in Section 3.8 can be used to receive messages of unknown length. (End of advice to users.) Advice to 1nlpl£mcnlors. Even though no specific behavior is mandated by MPI for erroneous programs, the recommended handling of overflow situations is to return in status information about the source and tag of the incoming message. The receive operation will return an error code. A quality implementation will also ensure that no memory that is outside the receive buffer will ever be overwritten.

In the case of a message shorter than the receive buffer, MPI is quite strict in that it allows no modification of the other locations. A more lenient t statement would allow for some optimizations but this is not allowed. The implementation must be ready to end a copy into the receiver memory exactly at the end of the receive buffer, even if it is an odd address. (End of advice to iyn~le7nentors.)

The selection of a message by a receive operation is governed by the value of the message envelope. A message can be received by a receive operation if its envelope matches the source, tag and comm values specified by the re ceive operation. The receiver may specify a wildcard MPI-ANY-SOURCE value for source, and/or a wildcard M Pl-ANY-TAG value for tag, indicating that any source and/or tag are acceptable. It cannot specify a wildcard value for comm. Thus, a message can be received by a receive operation only if it is addressed to the receiving process, has a matching communicator, has matching source unless source= MPIJ4NY_SOURCE in the pattern, and has a matching tag unless tag= MP1~4NY_TAG in the pattern. The message tag is specified by the tag argument of the receive operation. The argument source, if different from MPI-ANY-SOURCE, is specified as a rank within the process group associated with that same communicator (remote pro cess group, for inter-communicators). Thus, the range of valid values for the source argument is {0, ... , n -1 }U {I~IIPIJANY_SOURCE}, where n is the number of processes in this group. Note the asymmetry between send and receive operations: A receive opera tion may accept messages from an arbitrary sender, on the other hand, a send -°

operation must specify a unique receiver. This matches a &dquo;push&dquo; communication

mechanism, where data transfer is effected by the sender (rather than a &dquo;pull&dquo; 
mechanism, where data transfer is effected by the receiver). 
Source = destination is allowed, that is, a process can send a message to itself. 

### (However, it is unsafe to do so with the blocking send and receive operations described above, since this may lead to deadlock. See Section 3.5.)

Advice to implementors. Message context and other communicator infor mation can be implemented as an additional tag field. It differs from the regular message tag in that wildcard matching is not allowed on this field, and that value setting for this field is controlled by communicator manipulation functions. (End of advice to implementors.)

3.2.5 RETURN STATUS

’

The source or tag of a received message may not be known if wildcard values were used in the receive operation. The information is returned by the status argument of MPI_RECV. The type of status is MPI-defined. Status variables need to be explicitly allocated by the user, that is, they are not system objects. In C, status is a structure that contains two fields named MP!_SOURCE and MPI_TAG, and the structure may contain additional fields. Thus, status.MPl_ SOURCE and status.MPl_TAG contain the source and tag, respectively, of the received message. In Fortran, status is an array of INTEGERS of size )v)PLSTATUS-S!ZE. The two constants MPI_SOURCE and MPI_TAG are the indices of the entries that store the source and tag fields. Thus status(MPI_SOURCE) and status(MPI_TAG) contain, respectively, the source and the tag of the received message. The status argument also returns information on the length of the message received. However, this information is not directly available as a field of the status variable and a call to MPI_GET_COUNT is required to &dquo;decode&dquo; this information.

##### MPI_GET_COUNT(status, datatype, count)

I

N StatuS return status of receive operation (Status) IN datatype datatype of each receive buffer element (handle) OUT Count number of received elements (integer) int MPI_Get_count(MPI_Status *status, MPI~atatype datatype, int *count)

MFI_GET_COUNT(STATUS, DATATYPE, COUNT, IERROR) INTEGER STATUS (MPI-STATUS-SIZE), DATATYPE, COUNT, IERROR _ . Returns the number of elements received. (Again, we count elements, not bytes.) The datatype argument should match the argument provided by the receive call that set the status variable. (We shall later see, in Section 3.12.5, that

##### MPI_GET_COUNT may return, in certain situations, the value MPI_UNDEFINED.) .

Rat.ionale. Some message-passing libraries use INOUT count, tag and source arguments, thus using them both to specify the selection criteria for incoming messages and return the actual envelope values of the received message. The use of a separate status argument prevents errors that are often attached with INOUT argument (e.g., using the )vtP)JBNY/f7BG constant as the tag in a send). Some libraries use calls that refer implicitly to the &dquo;last message received.&dquo; This is not thread safe.

The datatype argument is passed to M Pl-GET-COUNT so as to improve performance. A message might be received without counting the number of elements it contains, and the count value is often not needed. Also, this allows the same function to be used after a call to MPI_PROBE. (End of rationale. ) All send and receive operations use the buf, count, datatype, source, dest, tag, comm, and status arguments in the same way as the blocking MPI_SEND and MPI_RECV operations described in this section.

3.3 Data Type Matching and Data Conversion 
3.3.1 TYPE MATCHING RULES 

### One can think of message transfer as consisting of the following three phases.

1. Data is pulled out of the send buffer and a message is assembled. 
2. A message is transferred from sender to receiver. 
3. Data is pulled from the incoming message and disassembled into the re 
ceive buffer. 

Type matching has to be observed at each of these three phases: The type of each variable in the sender buffer has to match the type specified for that entry by the send operation; the type specified by the send operation has to match the type specified by the receive operation; and the type of each variable in the receive buffer has to match the type specified for that entry by the receive operation. A program that fails to observe these three rules is erroneous. To define type matching more precisely, we need to deal with two issues: matching of types of the host language with types specified in communication operations; and matching of types at sender and receiver.

The types of a send and receive match (phase two) if both operations use identical names. That is, MPI_INTEGER matches MPI_INTEGER, MPI_REAL matches MPI_REAL, and so on. There is one exception to this rule, discussed in

Section 3.13, the type MPI_PACKED can match any other type. The type of a variable in a host program matches the type specified in the communication operation if the datatype name used by that operation corre sponds to the basic type of the host program variable. For example, an entry with type name MPI-INTEGER matches a Fortran variable of type INTEGER. A table giving this correspondence for Fortran and C appears in Section 3.2.2.

~~-

There are two exceptions to this last rule: an entry with type name MPI_BYTE or I’vIIPI_PACKED can be used to match any byte of storage (on a byte-addressable machine), irrespective of the datatype of the variable that contains this byte. The type MPI_PACKED is used to send data that has been explicitly packed, or receive data that will be explicitly unpacked, see Section 3.13. The type MPI_BYTE allows one to transfer the binary value of a byte in memory unchanged. To summarize, the type matching rules fall into the three categories below. . Communication of typed values (e.g., with datatype different from MPI_ BYTE), where the datatypes of the corresponding entries in the sender program, in the send call, in the receive call, and in the receiver program must all match. . Communication of untyped values (e.g., of datatype MPI_BYTE), where both sender and receiver use the datatype MPI_BYTE. In this case, there are no requirements on the types of the corresponding entries in the sender and the receiver programs, nor is it required that they be the same. . Communication involving packed data, where MPI_PACKED is used.

The following examples illustrate the first two cases.

Example 3.1 Sender and receiver specify matching types. 
CALL MPI_C0Mtl_RANK(comm, rank, ierr) 
IF(rank.EQ.O) THEN 
CALL MPI_SEND(a(l), 10, ~iFI_REAL, 1, tag, comm, ierr) 

ELSE

CALL MPI_RECV(b(1), 15, MPI_REAL, 0, tag, comm, status, ierr) END IF This code is correct if both a and b are real arrays of size > 10. (In Fortran, it might be correct to use this code even if a or b have size < 10: e.g., when a(1 ) can be equivalenced to an array with ten reals.)

Example 3.2 Sender and receiver do not specify matching types.

CALL MPI_COMM_RANKCcamm, rank, ierr) 
IF(rank.EQ.0) THEN 
CALL MPI_SEND(a(1), 10, MPI_REAL, 1, tag, comm, ierr) 

ELSE

CALL MPI RECV(b(1), 40, MPI-BYTE, 0, tag, comm, status, ierr) END IF

### This code is erroneous, since sender and receiver do not provide matching datatype arguments. Example 3.3 Sender and receiver specify communication of untyped values.

CALL MPI_COMM_RANK(comm, rank, ierr) IF(rank.EQ.0) THEN .

CALL MPI_SEND(a(1), 40, MPI_BYTE, 1, tag, comm, ierr)

ELSE

CALL MPT_RECV{b(1), 60, MPI_BYTE, 0, tag, comm, status, ierr) END IF This code is correct, irrespective of the type and size of a and b (unless this results in an out of bound memory access). Advice to users. If a buffer of type MPI_BYTE is passed as an argument to MPI_SEND, then MPI will send the data stored at contiguous locations, starting from the address indicated by the buf argument. This may have unexpected results when the data layout is not as a casual user would expect it to be. For example, some Fortran compilers implement variables of type CHARACTER as a structure that contains the character length and a pointer to the actual string. In such an environment, sending and receiving a Fortran CHARACTER variable using the MPI_BYTE type will not have the anticipated result of transferring the character string. For this reason, the user is advised to use typed communications whenever possible. (End of advice to users.)

Type MPI--CHARACTER

The type MP1_CHARACTER matches one character of a Fortran variable of type CHARACTER, rather then the entire character string stored in the variable. Fortran

variables of type CHARACTER or substrings are transferred as if they were arrays 
of characters. This is illustrated in the example below. 
Example 3.4 Transfer of Fortran CHARACTERS. 

CHARACTER*10 a CHARACTER*10 b

CALL MPI_COMM_RANK(comm, rank, ierr) 
IFCrank.EQ.O) THEN 
CALL MPI_SEND(a, 5, MPI_CHARACTER, 1, tag, comm, ierr) 

ELSE

CALL !~I_RECV(b(6:10), 5, MPI_CHARACTER, 0, tag, comm, status, ierr) END IF The last five characters of string b at process 1 are replaced by the first five characters of string a at process 0.

Rationale. The alternative choice would be for MPI-CHARACTER to match a character of arbitrary length. This runs into problems,

-

A Fortran character variable is a constant length string, with no special termination symbol. There is no fixed convention on how to represent characters, and how to store their length. Some compilers pass a character argument to a routine as a pair of arguments, one holding the address of the string and the other holding the length of string. Consider the case of an MPI communication call that is passed a communication buffer with type defined by a derived datatype (Section 3.12). If this communicator buffer contains variables of type CHARACTER then the information on their length will not be passed to the MPI routine. This problem forces us to provide explicit information on character length with the MPI call. One could add a length parameter to the type MPI_CHARACTER, but this does not add much convenience and the same functionality can be achieved by defining a suitable derived datatype. (End of rationale. )

Advice to implementors. Some compilers pass Fortran CHARACTER arguments as a structure with a length and a pointer to the actual string. In such an environment, the MPI call needs to dereference the pointer in order to reach the string. (End of advice to zrn~lementors.)

3.3.2 DATA CONVERSION

One of the goals of M Pl is to support parallel computations across heterogeneous 
environments. Communication in a heterogeneous environment may require 
data conversions. We use the following terminology. 
type conversion changes the datatype of a value, e.g., by rounding a REAL to an 
INTEGER. 

representation conversion changes the binary representation of a value, e.g., from Hex floating point to IEEE floating point.

The type matching rules imply that MPI communication never entails type conversion. On the other hand, MPI requires that a representation conversion be performed when a typed value is transferred across environments that use different representations for the datatype of this value. MPI does not specify rules for representation conversion. Such conversion is expected to preserve integer, logical, or character values, and to convert a floating point value to the nearest value that can be represented on the target system. Overflow and underflow exceptions may occur during floating point con versions. Conversion of integers or characters may also lead to exceptions when a value that can be represented in one system cannot be represented in the other system. An exception occurring during representation conversion results in a failure of the communication. An error occurs either in the send operation, or the receive operation, or both. If a value sent in a message is untyped (i.e., of type MPI_BYTE), then the binary representation of the byte stored at the receiver is identical to the binary representation of the byte loaded at the sender. This holds true, whether sender

and receiver run in the same or in distinct environments. No representation conversion is required. (Note that representation conversion may occur when values of type MPI_CHARACTER or MPI_CHAR are transferred, for example, from

an EBCDIC encoding to an ASCII encoding.) 
No conversion need occur when an M PI program executes in a homogeneous 
system, where all processes run in the same environment. 

Consider the three examples, 3.1-3.3. The first program is correct, assuming that a and b are REAL arrays of size > 10. If the sender and receiver execute in different environments, then the ten real values that are fetched from the send buffer will be converted to the representation for reals on the receiver site before they are stored in the receive buffer. While the number of real elements fetched from the send buffer equal the number of real elements stored in the receive buffer, the number of bytes stored need not equal the number of bytes loaded. For example, the sender may use a four byte representation and the receiver an eight byte representation for reals. The second program is erroneous, and its behavior is undefined. The third program is correct. The exact same sequence of forty bytes that were loaded from the send buffer will be stored in the receive buffer, even if sender and receiver run in a different environment. The message sent has exactly the same length (in bytes) and the same binary representation as the message received. If a and b are of different types, or if they are of the same type but different data representations are used, then the bits stored in the receive buffer may encode values that are different from the values they encoded in the send buffer.

Data representation conversion also applies to the envelope of a message: source, destination, and tag are all integers that may need to be converted. Advice to implementors. The current definition does not require messages to carry data type information. Both sender and receiver provide complete data type information. In a heterogeneous environment, one can either use a machine independent encoding such as XDR, or have the receiver convert from the sender representation to its own, or even have the sender do the conversion. Additional type information might be added to messages in order to allow the system to detect mismatches between datatype at sender and receiver. This might be particularly useful in a slower but safer debug mode. (End of advice to im~lementors.) MPI does not require support for inter-language communication. The be havior of a program is undefined if messages are sent by a C process and received by a Fortran process, or vice versa. Rationale. MPI does not handle inter-language communication because there are no agreed standards for the correspondence between C types and Fortran types. Therefore, MPI programs that mix languages would

### not port. (send of rationaL-.)

---

Advice to implementors. MPI implementors may want to support inter language communication by allowing Fortran programs to use &dquo;C MPI types,&dquo; such as MPUNT, MPI_CHAR, etc., and allowing C programs to use

#### Fortran types. (End of advice to implernentors.)

3.4 Communication Modes The send call described in Section 3.2.1 is blocking: it does not return until the message data and envelope have been safely stored away so that the sender is free to access and overwrite the send buffer. The message might be copied directly into the matching receive buffer, or it might be copied into a temporary system buffe r.

Message buffering decouples the send and receive operations. A blocking send can complete as soon as the message was buffered, even if no matching receive has been executed by the receiver. On the other hand, message buffer ing can be expensive, as it entails additional memory-to-memory copying, and it requires the allocation of memory for buffering. MPI offers the choice of several communication modes that allow one to control the choice of the communica tion protocol. The send call described in Section 3.2.1 used the standard communication mode. In this mode, it is up to MPI to decide whether outgoing messages will be buffered. MPI may buffer outgoing messages. In such a case, the send call may complete before a matching receive is invoked. On the other hand, buffer space may be unavailable, or MPI may choose not to buffer outgoing messages, for performance reasons. In this case, the send call will not complete until a matching receive has been posted, and the data has been moved to the receiver. Thus, a send in standard mode can be started whether or not a matching re ceive has been posted. It may complete before a matching receive is posted. The

standard mode send is non-local: successful completion of the send operation 
may depend on the occurrence of a matching receive. 
Rationale. The reluctance of MPI to mandate whether standard sends 
are buffering or not stems from the desire to achieve portable programs. 
Since any system will run out of buffer resources as message sizes are in 

creased, and some implementations may want to provide little buffering, MPI takes the position that correct (and therefore, portable) programs do not rely on system buffering in standard mode. Buffering may improve the performance of a correct program, but it doesn’t affect the result of the program. If the user wishes to guarantee a certain amount of buffering, the user-provided buffer system of Section 3.6 should be used, along with the buffered-mode send. (End of rationale.) } There are three additional communication modes.

A buffered mode send operation can be started whether or not a matching receive has been posted. It may complete before a matching receive is posted. However, unlike the standard send, this operation is local, and its completion

does not depend on the occurrence of a matching receive. Thus, if a send is executed and no matching receive is posted, then MPI must buffer the outgoing message, so as to allow the send call to complete. An error will occur if there is insufficient buffer space. The amount of available buffer space is controlled by the user-see Section 3.6. Buffer allocation by the user may be required for the buffered mode to be effective. A send that uses the synchronous mode can be started whether or not a matching receive was posted. However, the send will complete successfully only if a matching receive is posted, and the receive operation has started to receive the message sent by the synchronous send. Thus, the completion of a syn chronous send not only indicates that the send buffer can be reused, but also indicates that the receiver has reached a certain point in its execution, namely that it has started executing the matching receive. If both sends and receives are blocking operations then the use of the synchronous mode provides syn chronous communication semantics: a communication does not complete at either end before both processes rendezvous at the communication. A send executed in this mode is non-local. A send that uses the ready communication mode may be started only if the matching receive is already posted. Otherwise, the operation is erroneous and its outcome is undefined. On some systems, this allows the removal of a hand-shake operation that is otherwise required and results in improved performance. The completion of the send operation does not depend on the status of a match ing receive, and merely indicates that the send buffer can be reused. A send operation that uses the ready mode has the same semantics as a standard send operation, or a synchronous send operation; it is merely that the sender provides additional information to the system (namely that a matching receive is already posted), that can save some overhead. In a correct program, therefore, a ready send could be replaced by a standard send with no effect on the behavior of the program other than performance. Three additional send functions are provided for the three additional com munication modes. The communication mode is indicated by a one-letter prefix: B for buffered, S for synchronous, and R for ready.

MPI_BSEND (buf, count, datatype, dest, tag, comm)

IN bllf initial address of send buffer (choice) IN COUnt , number of elements in send buffer (integer) IN datatype datatype of each send buffer element (handle) IN dest rank of destination (integer) IN tag message tag (integer) IN comm communicator (handle)

int MPI-Bsend(void* buf, int count, MPI~atatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI_Comm comm)

mm

z

MPI-BSEND(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, IERROR) , BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, IERROR Send in buffered mode. -

MPI~SSEND (buf, count, datatype, dest, tag, comm) IN buf initial address of send buffer (choice) ,IN count number of elements in send buffer (integer) tN datatype datatype of each send buffer element (handle) iN dest rank of destination (integer) M tag message tag (integer) ’IN&dquo; comm communicator (handle) _

int MPI_Ssend(void* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int dest, 
int tag, MPI-Comm comm) 
MPI_SSEND(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, IERROR) 
 BUF(*) 
INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, IERROR 
Send in synchronous mode. 

-

MPLRSEND (buf, count, datatype, dest, tag, comm)

IN buf initial address of send buffer (choice) $NI count number of elements in send buffer (integer) IN- datatype datatype of each send buffer element (handle) IN dest rank of destination (integer) IN tag message tag (integer) ! comm communicator (handle)

int MPI-Rsend(void* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int dest, 
int tag, MPI-Comm comm) 
MPI_R.SEND(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, IERROR) 
 BUF(*) 
INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, IERROR 

Send in ready mode.

’

There is only one receive operation, which can match any of the send modes.

The receive operation described in the last section is blocking: it returns only after the receive buffer contains the newly received message. A receive can complete before the matching send has completed (of course, it can complete only after the matching send has started).

’

In a multi-threaded implementation of MPI, the system may de-schedule a thread that is blocked on a send or receive operation, and schedule another thread for execution in the same address space. In such a case it is the user’s responsibility not to access or modify a communication buffer until the commu nication completes. Otherwise, the outcome of the computation is undefined.

Rationale. We prohibit read accesses to a send buffer while it is being used, even though the send operation is not supposed to alter the con tent of this buffer. This may seem more stringent than necessary, but the additional restriction causes little loss of functionality and allows better performance on some systems-consider the case where data transfer is done by a DMA engine that is not cache-coherent with the main processor. (End of rationale.)

Advice to i?nplementors. Since a synchronous send cannot complete before a matching receive is posted, one will not normally buffer messages sent by such an operation. It is recommended to choose buffering over blocking the sender, when ever possible, for standard sends. The programmer can signal his or her preference for blocking the sender until a matching receive occurs by using the synchronous send mode. A possible communication protocol for the various communication modes is outlined below.

ready send: The message is sent as soon as possible. synchronous send: The sender sends a request-to-send message. The receiver stores this request. When a matching receive is posted, the receiver sends back a permission-to-send message, and the sender now sends the message. standard send: First protocol may be used for short messages, and second protocol for long messages. bufiFered send: The sender copies the message into a buffer and then sends it with a nonblocking send (using the same protocol as for standard send). Additional control messages might be needed for flow control and error recovery. Of course, there are many other possible protocols. Ready send can be implemented as a standard send. In this case there will be no performance advantage (or disadvantage) for the use of ready send. A standard send can be implemented as a synchronous send. In such a case, no data buffering is needed. However, many (most?) users expect some buffering. In a multi-threaded environment, the execution of a blocking com munication should block only the executing thread, allowing the thread scheduler to de-schedule this thread and schedule another thread for ex ecution. (End of advice to i~n~lementors.)

3.5 Semantics of Point-to-Point Communication

### A valid MPI implementation guarantees certain general properties of point-to point communication, which are described in this section.

Order Messages are non-overtaking: If a sender sends two messages in succession to the same destination, and both match the same receive, then this operation cannot receive the second message if the first one is still pending. If a receiver posts two receives in succession, and both match the same message, then the second receive operation cannot be satisfied by this message, if the first one is still pending. This requirement facilitates matching of sends to receives. It guarantees that message-passing code is deterministic, if processes are single threaded and the wildcard MPLANY _SOURCE is not used in receives. (Some of the calls described later, such as MPI_CANCEL or MPP_WAITANY, are additional sources of nandetenninism. ) If a process has a single thread of execution, then any two communications executed by this process are ordered. On the other hand, if the process is multi threaded, then the semantics of thread execution may not define a relative order between two send operations executed by two distinct threads. The operations are logically concurrent, even if one physically precedes the other. In such a case, the two messages sent can be received in any order. Similarly, if two receive

operations that are logically concurrent receive two successively sent messages, 
then the two messages can match the two receives in either order. 
Example 3.5 An example of non-overtaking messages. 
CALL MPI-COMM-RANK(comm, rank, ierr) 
IF (rar~k.EQ.O) THEN 
CALL MPI_BSEND(bufl, count, MPI_REAL, 1, tag, comm, ierr) 
CALL MPI_BSEND(buf2, count, MPI_REAL, 1, tag, comm, ierr) 
ELSE ! ra.nk . EQ . I 
CALL MPI_RECV(bufl, count, MPI-REAL, 0, MPI_ANY_TAG, comm, status, ierr) 
CALL MPI_RECV(buf2, count, MPI_REAL, 0, tag, comm, status, ierr) 
END IF 
The message sent by the first send must be received by the first receive, and the 
message sent by the second send must be received by the second receive. 

Progress If a pair of matching send and receives have been initiated on two processes, then at least one of these two operations will complete, independently of other actions in the system: the send operation will complete, unless the receive is satisfied by another message, and completes; the receive operation will complete, unless the message sent is consumed by another matching receive that was posted at the same destination process.

### Example 3.6 An example of two, intertwined matching pairs.

CALL MPI_COMM_RANKCcomm, rank, ierr) IF (rank . EQ . 0) THEN CALL MPI_BSEND(bufl, count, MPI_REAL, 1, tagl, comm, ierr) ’ CALL MPI_SSEND(buf2, count, MPI_REAL, 1, tag2, comm, ierr) ELSE ! rank.EQ.1 I CALL MPI_RECV(bufl, count, MPI_REAL, 0, tag2, comm, status, ierr) CALL MPI-RECV(buf2, count, MPI_REAL, 0, tagl, comm, status, ierr) END IF

Both processes invoke their first communication call. Since the first send of process zero uses the buffered mode, it must complete, irrespective of the state of process one. Since no matching receive is posted, the message will be copied into buffer space. (If insufficient buffer space is available, then the program will fail.) The second send is then invoked. At that point, a matching pair of send and receive operations is enabled, and both operations must complete. Process one next invokes its second receive call, which will be satisfied by the buffered message. Note that process one received the messages in the reverse order they were sent.

Fairness MPI makes no guarantee of fairness in the handling of communica tion. Suppose that a send is posted. Then it is possible that the destination process repeatedly posts a receive that matches this send, yet the message is never received, because it is each time overtaken by another message, sent from another source. Similarly, suppose that a receive was posted by a multi-threaded process. Then it is possible that messages that match this receive are repeatedly received, yet the receive is never satisfied, because it is overtaken by other re ceives posted at this node (by other executing threads). It is the programmer’s responsibility to prevent starvation in such situations.

Resource limitations Any pending communication operation consumes system resources that are limited. Errors may occur when lack of resources prevent the , execution of an MPI call. A quality implementation will use a (small) fixed amount of resources for each pending send in the ready or synchronous mode and for each pending receive. However, buffer space may be consumed to store messages sent in standard mode, and must be consumed to store messages sent in buffered mode, when no matching receive is available. The amount of space available for buffering will be much smaller than program data memory on many systems. Then, it will be easy to write programs that overrun available buffer space. MPI allows the user to provide buffer memory for messages sent in the buffered mode. Furthermore, MPI specifies a detailed operational model for the use of this buffer. An MPI implementation is required to do no worse than

MENEM >

implied by this model. This allows users to avoid buffer overflows when they use buffered sends. Buffer allocation and use is described in Section 3.6. A buffered send operation that cannot complete because of a lack of buffer space is erroneous. When such a situation is detected, an error is signalled that may cause the program to terminate abnormally. On the other hand, a standard send operation that cannot complete because of lack of buffer space will merely block, waiting for buffer space to become available or for a matching receive to be posted. This behavior is preferable in many situations. Consider a situation where a producer repeatedly produces new values and sends them

’

to a consumer. Assume that the producer produces new values faster than the consumer can consume them. If buffered sends are used, then a buffer overflow will result. Additional synchronization has to be added to the program so as to prevent this from occurring. If standard sends are used, then the producer will be automatically throttled, as its send operations will block when buffer space is unavailable. In some situations, a lack of buffer space leads to deadlock. This is illustrated by the examples below. Example 3.&dquo;l An exchange of messages.

’

CALL MPI-COMM-RANK(co=, rank, ierr) .. 
IF (ran~c.EQ.Q) THEN 
CALL MPI_SEND(sendbuf, count, MPI_REAL, 1, tag, comm, ierr) 
CALL MPI_RECV(recvbuf, count, MPI_REAL, 1, tag, comm, status, ierr) 
ELSE ! rank.EQ.i I 
CALL MPI-RECV(recvbuf, count, MPI_REAL, 0, tag, comm, status, ierr) 
CALL MPI_SEND(sendbuf, count, MPI_REAL, 0, tag, comm, ierr) 
END IF < 

This program will succeed even if no buffer space for data is available. The

standard send operation can be replaced, in this example, with a synchronous 
send. 
Example 3.8 An attempt to exchange messages. 
CALL MPI_COMM_RANK(comm, rank, ierr) 
IF (rank.EQ.0) THEN 
CALL MPI_RECV(recvbuf, count, MPI_REAL, 1, tag, comm, status, ierr) 
CALL MPI_SEND(sendbuf, count, MPI_REAL, 1, tag, comza, ierr) 
ELSE ! rank.EQ.I I 

CALL MPI_RECV(recvbuf, count, MPI_REAL, 0, tag, comm, status, ierr) ’ CALL MPI-SEND(sendbuf, count, MPI_REAL, 0, tag, comm, ierr) END IF

The receive operation of the first process must complete before its send, and can complete only if the matching send of the second processor is executed. The receive operation of the second process must complete before its send and

can complete only if the matching send of the first process is executed. This program will always deadlock. The same holds for any other send mode.

### Example 3.9 An exchange that relies on buffering.

CALL MPI_COMM_RANK(comm, rank, ierr) 
IF (rank. E(~ . 0) THEN 
CALL MPI_SEND(sendbuf, count, MPI_REAL, 1, tag, comm, ierr) 
CALL MPI_RECVCrecvbuf, count, MPI_REAL, 1, tag, comm, status, ierr) 
ELSE ! raz~.k . EQ . I 
CALL MPI_SEND(sendbuf, count, MPI_REAL, 0, tag, comm, ierr) 
CALL MPI_RECV(recvbuf, count, MPI_REAL, 0, tag, comm, status, ierr) 
END IF 

The message sent by each process has to be copied out before the send operation returns and the receive operation starts. For the program to complete, it is necessary that at least one of the two messages sent be buffered. Thus, this program can succeed only if the communication system can buffer at least count words of data.

Advice to users. When standard send operations are used, then a deadlock situation may occur where both processes are blocked because buffer space is not available. The same will certainly happen, if the synchronous mode is used. If the buffered mode is used, and not enough buffer space is available, then the program will not complete either. However, rather than a deadlock situation, we will have a buffer overflow error.

A program is &dquo;safe&dquo; if no message buffering is required for the program to complete. One can replace all sends in such program with synchronous sends, and the program will still run correctly. This conservative program ming style provides the best port.ability, since program completion does not depend on the amount of buffer space available or in the communication protocol used. Many programmers prefer to have more leeway and be able to use the &dquo;unsafe&dquo; programming style shown in example 3.9. In such cases, the use of standard sends is likely to provide the best compromise between per formance and robustness: quality implementations will provide sufficient buffering so that &dquo;common practice&dquo; programs will not deadlock. The buffered send mode can be used for programs that require more buffer ing, or in situations where the programmer wants more control. This mode might also be used for debugging purposes, as buffer overflow conditions are easier to diagnose than deadlock conditions. Nonblocking message-passing operations, as described in Section 3.7, can be used to avoid the need for buffering outgoing messages. This prevents deadlocks due to lack of buffer space, and improves performance, by allowing overlap of computation and communication, and avoiding the

-*-

overheads of allocating buffers and copying messages into buffers. (End of advice to users.) 3.6 Buffer Allocation and Usage A user may specify a buffer to be used for buffering messages sent in buffered mode. Buffering is done by the sender.

MPI_BUFFER~4TTAC1-I( bufifer, size) If(&dquo; buffer initial buffer address (choice) iN size buffer size, in bytes (integer)

int MPI~uffer_attach( void* buffer, int size) 
MPI-BUFFER-ATTACH( BUFFER, SIZE, IERROR) 
 BUFFER(*) 
INTEGER SIZE, IERROR 

Provides to MPI a buffer in the user’s memory to be used for buffering outgoing messages. The buffer is used only by messages sent in buffered mode. Only one buffer can be attached to a process at a time.

MPI-BUFFER_DETACH( buffer, size)

OUT buffer initial buffer address (choice) OUT Size buffer size, in bytes (integer)

int MPI-Buffer-detach( void** buffer, int* size) 
MPIJBUFFER...DETACH( BUFFER, SIZE, IERROR) 
 BUFFER(*) 
INTEGER SIZE, IERROR 
Detach the buffer currently associated with MPI. This operation will block 
until all messages currently in the buffer have been transmitted. Upon return 
of this function, the user may reuse or deallocate the space taken by the buffer. 
The statements made in this section describe the behavior of MPI for buf 
fered-mode sends. When no buffer is currently associated, MPI behaves as if a 

zero-sized buffer is associated with the process. MPI must provide as much buffering for outgoing messages as if outgoing message data were buffered by the sending process, in the specified buffer space, using a circular, contiguous-space allocation policy. We outline below a model implementation that defines this policy. MPI may provide more buffering, and may use a better buffer allocation algoridim than described below. On the other hand, MPI may signal an error whenever the simple buffering allocator described below would run out of space. In particular, if no buffer is explicitly associated with the process, then any buffered send may cause an error.

### MPI does not provide mechanisms for querying or controlling buffering done by standard mode sends. It is expected that vendors will provide such information for their implementations.

’

Rationale. There is a wide spectrum of possible implementations of buffered communication: buffering can be done at sender, at receiver, or both; buffers can be dedicated to one sender-receiver pair, or be shared by all communications; buffering can be done in real or in virtual mem ory ; it can use dedicated memory, or memory shared by other processes; buffer space may be allocated statically or be changed dynamically; etc. It does not seem feasible to provide a portable mechanism for querying or controlling buffering that would be compatible with all these choices, yet provide meaningful information. (End nf rationale.)

3.6.1 MODEL IMPLEMENTATION OF BUFFER’ED MODE The model implementation uses the packing and unpacking functions described in Section 3.13 and the nonblocking communication functions described in Section 3.7. We assume that a circular queue of pending message entries (PME) is main tained. Each entry contains a communication request handle that identifies a pending nonblocking send, a pointer to the next entry and the packed message data. The entries are stored in successive locations in the buffer. Free space is available between the queue tail and the queue head. A buffered send call results in the execution of the following code.

. Traverse sequentially the PME queue from head toward the tail, deleting all entries for communications that have completed, up to the first entry with an uncompleted request; update queue head to point to that entry. . Compute the number, n, of bytes needed to store entry for new message (length of packed message computed with MPLPACK-SIZE plus space for

request handle and pointer). . Find the next contiguous empty space of n bytes in buffer (space following queue tail, or space at start of buffer if queue tail is too close to end of buffer). If space not found then raise buffer overflow error. o Append to end of PME queue in contiguous space the new entry that contains request handle, next pointer, and packed message data; 6111 PI_PACK is used to pack data. 9 Post nonblocking send (standard mode) for packed data. . Return

3.7 Nonblocklng Communication One can improve performance on many systems by overlapping communication and computation. This is especially true on systems where communication can be executed autonomously by an intelligent communication controller. Light-

-

’ ’

weight threads are one mechanism for achieving such overlap. An alternative mechanism that often leads to better performance is to use nonblocking com munication A nonblocking send start call initiates the send operation, but does not complete it. The send start call will return before the message was copied out of the send buffer. A separate send complete call is needed to complete the communication, i.e., to verify that the data has been copied out of the send buffer. With suitable hardware, the transfer of data out of the sender memory may proceed concurrently with computations done at the sender after the send was initiated and before it completed. Similarly, a nonblocking receive start call initiates the receive operation, but does not complete it. The call will return be fore a message is stored into the receive buffer. A separate receive complete call is needed to complete the receive operation and verify that the data has been received into the receive buffer. With suitable hardware, the transfer of data into the receiver memory may proceed concurrently with computations done after the receive was initiated and before it completed. The use of nonblocking receives may also avoid system buffering and memory-to-memory copying, as information is provided early on the location of the receive buffer. Nonblocking send start calls can use the same four modes as blocking sends:

standard, buffered, synchronous and ready. These carry the same meaning. Sends of all modes, ready excepted, can be started whether a matching receive has been posted or not; a nonblocking ready send can be started only if a match ing receive is posted. In all cases, the send start call is local: it returns immedi ately, irrespective of the status of other processes. If the call causes some system resource to be exhausted, then it will fail and return an error code. Quality implementations of MPI should ensure that this happens only in &dquo;pathological&dquo; cases. That is, an MPI implementation should be able to support a large number of pending nonblocking operations. The send-complete call returns when data has been copied out of the send buffer. It may carry additional meaning, depending on the send mode. If the send mode is synchronous, then the send can complete only if a matching receive has started. That is, a receive has been posted, and has been matched with the send. In this case, the send-complete call is non-local. Note that a synchronous, nonblocking send may complete, if matched by a nonblock ing receive, before the receive complete call occurs. (It can complete as soon as the sender &dquo;knows&dquo; the transfer will complete, but before the receiver &dquo;knows&dquo;

the transfer will complete.) If the send mode is buffered then the message must be buffered if there is no pending receive. In this case, the send-complete call is local, and must succeed irrespective of the status of a matching receive. If the send mode is standard then the send-complete call may return before a matching receive occurred, if the message is buffered. On the other hand, the send-complete may not complete until a matching receive occurred, and the message was copied into the receive buffer. Nonblocking sends can be matched with blocking receives, and vice versa.

Advice to users. The completion of a send operation may be delayed, for standard mode, and must be delayed, for synchronous mode, until a matching receive is posted. The use of nonblocking sends in these two cases allows the sender to proceed ahead of the receiver, so that the computation is more tolerant of fluctuations in the speeds of the two processes. Nonblocking sends in the buffered and ready modes have a more lim ited impact. A nonblocking send will return as soon as possible, whereas a blocking send will return after the data has been copied out of the sender memory. The use of nonblocking sends is advantageous in these cases only if data copying can be concurrent with computation. The message-passing model implies that communication is initiated by the sender. The communication will generally have lower overhead if a re ceive is already posted when the sender initiates the communication (data can be moved directly to the receive buffer, and there is no need to queue a pending send request). However, a receive operation can complete only after the matching send has occurred. The use of nonblocking receives allows one to achieve lower communication overheads without blocking the receiver while it waits for the send. (End of advice to users.)

3.7.1 COMMUNICATION OBJECTS Nonblocking communications use opaque request objects to identify commu nication operations and match the operation that initiates the communication with the operation that terminates it. These are system objects that are accessed via a handle. A request object identifies various properties of a communication operation, such as the send mode, the communication buffer that is associated with it, its context, the tag and destination arguments to be used for a send, or the tag and source arguments to be used for a receive. In addition, this object stores information about the status of the.pending communication operation.

3.7.2 COMMUNICATION INITIATION

We use the same naming conventions as for blocking communication: a prefix of B, S, or R is used for buffered, synchronous or ready mode. In addition a prefix of I (for immediate) indicates that the call is nonblocking. MPI_ISEND(buf, count, datatype, dest, tag, comm, request)

IN buf initial address of send buffer (choice) IN count number of elements in send buffer (integer) IN datatype datatype of each send buffer element (handle) IN dest rank of destination (integer) IN tag message tag (integer) IN Comm communicator (handle) OUT request communication request (handle)

int MPI-Isend(void* buf, int count, MPI~atatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI-Request *request)

MFI_ISEND(BITF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR

Start a standard mode, nonblocking send.

##### MPI-IBSEND(buf, count, datatype, dest, tag, comm, request)

IN buf initial address of send buffer (choice) ’ count number of elements in send buffer (integer) IN datatype datatype of each send buffer element (handle) TN ’ dest rarrk of destination (integer) IN tag message tag (integer) IN comm communicator (handle) OUT request communication request (handle)

int MPI-Ibsend(void* buf, int count, MPIJDatatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI_Request *request)

MPI-IBSEND(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR

Start a buffered mode, nonblocking send.

MPI-ISSEND(buf, count, datatype, dest, tag, comm, request)

. buf initial address of send buffer (choice)

IN COUnt number of elements in send buffer (integer) ’1iN datatype datatype of each send buffer element (handle) IN dest rank of destination (integer) )~I~ tag message tag (integer) IN comm communicator (handle) OUT request communication request (handle)

int MPI_Issend(void* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int dest, int tag, H1PI_C:pItUA comm, MPI-Request *request)

MPI-ISSEND(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR

Start a synchronous mode, nonblocking send.

##### MPI-IRSEND(buf, count, datatype, dest, tag, comm, request)

IN buf initial address of send buffer (choice) IN count number of elements in send buffer (integer) IN datatype datatype of each send buffer element (handle) IN dest rank of’ destination (integer) IN tag message tag (integer) IN Comm communicator (handle) OUT request communication request (handle) int MPI_Irsend(void* huf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int dest,

int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI-Request *request)

MPI_IRSEND(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR Start a ready mode nonblocking send.

##### MPI_IRECV (buf, count, datatype, source, tag, comm, request)

OUT buf initial address of receive buffer (choice) IN count number of elements in receive buffer (integer) IN datatype datatype of each receive buffer element (handle) IN source rank of source (integer) IN tag . message tag (integer) IN Comm communicator (handle) OUT request communication request (handle) int MPI-Irecv(void* huf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int source, int tag, XPI-comm comm, MPI=Request *request)

MPI-IRECV(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, SOURCE, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, SOURCE, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR Start a nonblocking receive. These calls allocate a communication request object and associate it with the request handle (the argument request). The request can be used later to query the status of the communication or wait for its completion. A nonblocking send call indicates that the system may start copying data out of the send buffer. The sender should not access any part of the send buffer after a nonblocking send operation is called, until the send completes. A nonblocking receive call indicates that the system may start writing data into the receive buffer. The receiver should not access any part of the receive buffer after a nonblocking receive operation is called, until the receive com

### pletes.

Room .

3.7.3 COMMUNICATION COMPLETION

The functions MPI_WAIT and MPI-TEST are used to complete a nonblocking communication. The completion of a send operation indicates that the sender is now free to update the locations in the send buffer (the send operation itself leaves the content of the send buffer unchanged). It does not indicate that the message has been received, rather, it may have been buffered by the communica tion subsystem. However, if a synchronous mode send was used, the completion of the send operation indicates that a matching receive was initiated, and that the message will eventually be received by this matching receive. The completion of a receive operation indicates that the receive buffer con tains the received message, the receiver is now free to access it, and that the status object is set. It does not indicate that the matching send operation has completed (but indicates, of course, that the send was initiated). We shall use the following terminology. A n~ull handle is a handle with value MP~_REQUEST_NULL. A persistent request and the handle to it are inactive if the request is not associated with any ongoing communication (see Section 3.9). A handle is active if it is neither null nor inactive.

!B/)PLWA)T(request, status)

INOUT request request (handle) OUT status status object (Status)

int MPI_Wait(MPI~Lequest *request, MPI-Status *status) MPI-WAIT(REQUEST, STATUS, TERROR) INTEGER REQUEST, ST,ATUS(MPI_STATUS_SIZR) , IERROR

A call to MPI_WAIT returns when the operation identified by request is com plete. If the communication object associated with this request was created by a nonblocking send or receive call, then the object is deallocated by the call to MPI_WAIT and the request handle is set to MPI_REQUEST_NULL. MPI_WAIT is a

non-local operation. 
The call returns, in status, information on the completed operation. The 
content of the status object for a receive operation can be accessed as described 
in Section 3.2.5. The status object for a send operation may be queried by a call 
to MPLTEST~CANCELLED (see Section 3.8). 
One is allowed to call MPl_WAIT with a null or inactive request argument. 
In this case the operation returns immediately. The status argument is set to 

return tag = MPI-ANY-TAG, source = MPI-ANY-SOURCE, and is also internally configured so that calls to MPLGET-COUNT and MPI-GET-ELEMENTS return count = 0.

Rationale. This makes MPLWAIT functionally equivalent to MPLWAITALL with a list of length one and adds some elegance. Status is set in this way so as to prevent errors due to accesses of stale information.

Successful return of MPI_WAIT after a MPI-IBSEND implies that the user send buffer can be reused-i.e., data has been sent out or copied into a buffer attached with MPI_BUFFER~TTACH. Note that, at this point, we can no longer cancel the send (see Section 3.8). If a matching receive is never posted, then the buffer cannot be freed. This runs somewhat counter to the stated goal of MPI_CANCEL (always being able to free program space that was committed to the communication subsystem). (End of rationale.)

Advice to implemenloi-s. In a multi-threaded environment, a call to M PL WAIT should block only the calling thread, allowing the thread scheduler to schedule another thread for execution. (End of advice to ~~re~le~mentors.)

MPI~TEST(request, flag, status) INOUT request communication request (handle) OUT flag true if operation completed (logical) OUT status status object (Status)

int MPI_Test(MPI~i.equest *request, int *flag, MPI-Status *status) 
MPI_TEST(REQUEST, FLAG, STATUS, IERROR) 
LOGICAL FLAG 
INTEGER REQUEST, STATUS (MPI-STATUS-SIZE), IERROR 

A call to MPLTEST returns flag = true if the operation identified by request is complete. In such a case, the status object is set to contain information on the completed operation; if the communication object was created by a non blocking send or receive, then it is deallocated and the request handle is set to MPLREQUEST-NULL. The call returns flag = false, otherwise. In this case, the value of the status object is undefined. MPI-TEST is a local operation. The return status object for a receive operation carries information that can

be accessed as described in Section 3.2.5. The status object for a send operation 
carries information that can be accessed by a call to MPI_TEST_CANCELLED (see 
Section 3.8). 
One is allowed to call MPI_TEST with a null or inactive request argument. 
In such a case the operation returns flag = false. 
The functions MPI_WAIT and MPI-TEST can be used to complete both sends 
and receives. 
Advice to users. The use of the nonblocking MPLTEST call allows the 
user to schedule alternative activities within a single thread of execution. 
An event-driven thread scheduler can be emulated with periodic calls to 

##### MPLTEST. (End of advice to users.)

Example 3.10 Simple usage of nonblocking operations and MPIvWAIT.

CALL MPI_COMM_RANK(comm, rank, ierr) 
IF(rank.EQ.0) THEN , 
CALL MPI_ISEND(a(1), 10, MPI_REAL, 1, tag, comm, request, ierr) 
**** do some computation to mask latency **** 
CALL MPI_WAIT(request, status, ierr) 

ELSE

CALL MPI_IRECV(a(1), 15, MPI_REAL, 0, tag, comm., request, ierr) **** do some computation to mask latency ****

CALL MPI_WAIT(request, status, ierr) END IF

A request object can be deallocated without waiting for the associated com munication to complete, by using the following operation. MPI-REQUEST-FREE(request) INOUT request communication request (handle)

int MPI -Request -f r ee (MPI -Request *request) 
MP I -REQUEST -FREE (REQUEST, IERROR) 
INTEGER REQUEST, IERROR 
Mark the request object for deallocation and set request to MP1_REQUEST_ 
NULL. An ongoing communication that is associated with the request will be 

### allowed to complete. The request will be deallocated only after its completion.

Rationale. The MPI_REQUEST_FREE mechanism is provided for reasons of performance and convenience on the sending side. (send of rationale.) Advice to users. Once a request is freed by a call to MPI_REQUEST_FREE, it is not possible to check for the successful completion of the associated communication with calls to MPI_WAIT or MPI_TEST..A.lso, if an error oc curs subsequently during the communication, an error code cannot be returned to the user-such an error must be treated as fatal. Questions arise as to how one knows when the operations have completed when using MPI-REQUEST-FREE. Depending on the program logic, there maybe other ways in which the program knows that certain operations have completed and this makes usage of MPI-REQUEST-FREE practical. For example, an active send request could be freed when the logic of the program is such that the receiver sends a reply to the message sent-the arrival of the reply informs the sender that the send has completed and the send buffer can be reused. An active receive request should never be freed as the receiver will have no way to verify that the receive has completed and the receive buffer can be reused. (End of advice to users.)

Example 3.11 An example using MPI_REQUEST_FREE.

CALL MPI-COMM-RANK(MPI-COMM-WORLD, rank) 
IF (rank . EQ . 0 ) THEN 
DO i=1, n 
CALL MPI_ISEND(outval, 1, MPI_REAL, 1, 0, req, ierr) 
CALL MPI_REQZJEST_FREE(req, ierr) 

CALL MPI_IRECV(inval, 1, MPI_REAL, 1, 0, req, ierr) CALL MPI-WAIT(req, status, ierr)

END DO ELSE ! rank.EQ.i I

CALL MPI_IRECV(inval, 1, MPI_REAL, 0, 0, req, ierr) 
CALL MPI_WAIT(req, status) . , 
DO I=1, n-1 
CALL MPI_ISEND(outval, 1, MPI_REAL, 0, 0, req, ierr) 
CALL MPI_REQUEST_FREE(req, ierr) 
CALL MPI_IRECV(inval, 1, MPI_REAL, 0, 0, req, ierr) 
CALL KPI-WAIT(req, status, ierr) . 

END DO

CALL MPI_ISEND(outval, 1, MPI_REAL, 0, 0, req, ierr) CALL MPI-WAIT(req, status)

END IF

3.7.4 SEMANTICS OF NONBLOCKING COMMUNICATIONS

#### The semantics of nonblocking communication is defined by suitably extending the definitions in Section 3.5.

Order Nonblocking communication operations are ordered according to the execution order of the calls that initiate the communication. The non-over taking requirement of Section 3.5 is extended to nonblocking communication, with this definition of order being used.

### Example 3.12 Message ordering for nonblocking operations.

CALL MPI_COMM_RANK(comm, rank, ierr)

IF (RANK.EQ.O) THEN CALL MPI_ISEND(a, 1, MPI_REAL, 1, 0, comm, rl, ierr) CALL MPI_ISEND(b, 1, MPI_REAL, 1, 0, comm, r2, ierr)

ELSE ! rank.EQ.1 1

CALL MPI_IRECV(a, 1, MPI_REAL, 0, MPI_ANY_TAG, comm, rl, ierr) CALL MPI_IRECV(b, 1, MPI_REAL, 0, 0, comm, r2, ierr)

END IF

CALL MP1_WA1T(r1,status) CALL MPI-WAIT(r2,status)

-

’

The first send of process zero will match the first receive of process one, even if both messages are sent before process one executes either receive.

Progress A call to MPI_WAIT that completes a receive will eventually terminate and return if a matching send has been started, unless the send is satisfied by another receive. In particular, if the matching send is nonblocking, then the receive should complete even if no call is executed by the sender to complete the send. Similarly, a call to MPI_WAIT that completes a send will eventually return if a matching receive has been started, unless the receive is satisfied by another send, and even if no call is executed to complete the receive. Example 3.13 An illustration of progress semantics.

CALL MPI_CD1HM_RANK(comm, rank, ierr) 
IF (RANK.EQ.0) THEN 
CALL MPI_SSEND(a, 1, MPI_REAL, 1, 0, comm, ierr) 
CALL MPI_SEND(b, 1, MPI_Fi,EAL, 1, 1, comm, ierr) 
ELSE ! ranl~ . Ei~ .1 I 
CALL MPI_IRECV(a, 1, MPI_REAL, 0, 0, comm, r, ierr) 
CALL MPI_RECVCb, 1, MPI_REAL, 0, 1, comm, ierr) 
CALL MPI-WAIT(r, status, ierr) 

’

END IF

This code should not deadlock in a correct MPI implementation. The first synchronous send of process zero must complete after process one posts the matching (nonblocking) receive even if process one has not yet reached the completing wait call. Thus, process zero will continue and execute the second send, allowing process one to complete execution.

If an MPI_TEST that completes a receive is repeatedly called with the same arguments, and a matching send has been started, then the call will eventu ally return flag = true, unless the send is satisfied by another receive. If an MPI_TEST that completes a send is repeatedly called with the same arguments, and a matching receive has been started, then the call will eventually return flag = true, unless the receive is satisfied by another send.

3.7.5 MULTIPLE COMPLETIONS

’

It is convenient to be able to wait for the completion of any, some, or all the operations in a list, rather than having to wait for a specific message. A call to MPI_WAITANY or MPI_TESTAIVY can be used to wait for the completion of one out of several operations. A call to MPI_WAITALL or MPI_TESTALL can be used to wait for all pending operations in a list. A call to MPI-WAITSOME or MPI_TESTSOME can be used to complete all enabled operations in a list.

MPI_WAITANY (count, array-of-requests, index, status) 
IN count list length (integer) 
INOUT array-of-requests array of requests (array of handles) 
OUT index index of handle for operation that completed 
(integer) 
OUT status status object (Status) 
int MPI_Waitany(int count, MPI-Request *array-of -requests, int *index, 
MPI-Status *status) 
MPI~WAITANY(COUNT, ARRAY_OF-REQUESTS, INDEX, STATUS, IERROR) 
INTEGER COUNT, ARRAY-OFJREQUESTS(*), INDEX, STATUS (MPI-STATUS~SIZE), 
IERROR 

Blocks until one of the operations associated with the active requests in the array has completed. If more then one operation is enabled and can terminate, one is arbitrarily chosen. Returns in index the index of that request in the array and returns in status the status of the completing communication. (The array is indexed from zero in C, and from one in Fortran. ) If the request was allocated by a nonblocking communication operation, then it is deallocated and the request handle is set to MPI-REQUEST-NULL. The array-of-requests list may contain null or inactive handles. If the list contains no active handles (list has length zero or all entries are null or inactive), then the call returns immediately with index = MPI_UNDEFINED. The execution of MPI_WAITANY~count, array-of-requests, index, status) has the same effect as the execution of MPI-WAIT(barray-of-requests[I], status), where i is the value returned by index. MPI_WAITANY with an array containing one active entry is equivalent to MPI_WAIT.

MP!_TESTANY(caunt, array-of-requests, index, flag, status) 
IN count list length (integer) 
INOUT array-of-requests array of requests (array of handles) 
OUT index index of operation that completed, or MPI_UN 
DEFINED if none completed (integer) 
OUT f lag true if one of the operations is complete (logical) 
OUT status status object (Status) 
int MPI_Testany(int count, MPI_R.equest *array_of_requests, int *index, 
int *flag, MPI-Status *status) 
MPI_TESTANY(COUNT, ARRAY -OF -REQUESTS, INDEX, FLAG, STATUS, IERROR) 
LOGICAL FLAG 

INTEGER COUNT, ARRAY_aF_RE(~UESTS(*) , INDEX, STATUS(MPI_STATT3S_SIZ£) , IERROR

-

Tests for completion of either one or none of the operations associated with active handles. In the former case, it returns flag = true, returns in index the index of this request in the array, and returns in status the status of that operation; if the request was allocated by a nonblocking communication call then the request is deallocated and the handle is set to MPI-REQUEST-NULL. (The array is indexed from zero in C, and from one in Fortran.) In the latter case, it returns flag = false, returns a value of MPI_UNDEFINED in index and status is undefined. The array may contain null or inactive handles. If the array contains no active handles then the call returns immediately with flag = false, index =

MPI_UNDEFINED, and status undefined. The execution of MPI_TESTANY(count, array-of-requests, index, status) has the same effect as the execution of MPI_TEST(&array_oLrequests[i], flag, status), for i=0, 1 ,... , count-1, in some arbitrary order, until one call returns flag = true, or all fail. In the former case, index is set to the last value of i, and in the latter case, it is set to MPI_UNDEFINED. MPI_TESTANY with an array containing one active entry is equivalent to MPLTEST.

MPI_WAITALL( count, array-of-requests, array-of-statuses) IN count lists length (integer) INOUT array-of-requests array of requests (array of handles) OUT array-of -statuses array of status objects (array of Status)

int MPI-Waitall(int count, MPI-Request *array_of _requests, 
MPI-Status *array_of_statuses) 
MPI.WAITALL(COUNT, ARRAY_OF~?.EQUESTS, ARRAY_OF~TATUSES~ IERROR) 
INTEGER COUNT, ARRAY_OF~i.EQUESTS ( * ) 
INTEGER ARRAY-0F -STATUSES (MP I _STATUS-S IZE , * ) , IERRDR 
Blocks until all communication operations associated with active handles in 
the list complete, and return the status of all these operations (this includes the 
case where no handle in the list is active). Both arrays have the same number 
of valid entries. The i-th entry in array-of-statuses is set to the return status 
of the i-th operation. Requests that were created by nonblocking communi 
cation operations are deallocated and the corresponding handles in the array 
are set to MPI_REQUEST_NULL. The list may contain null or inactive handles. 
The call returns in the status of each such entry tag = MPI-ANY-TAG, source 
= MPI-ANY-SOURCE, and each status entry is also configured so that calls to 
MPI_GET_COUNT and MPI_GET_ELEMENTS return count = 0. 

The execution of MPI-WAITALL(count, array-of-requests, array-of-statuses) has the same effectas the execution ofm Pl-WAIT(barray-of-request[I] , ftarray_of_ statuses[i]), for i=0 ,... , count-1, in some arbitrary order. MPLWAITALL with an array of length one is equivalent to MPI_WAIT.

##### MPI_TESTALL(count, array-of-requests, flag, array-of-statuses) IN count lists length (integer) INOUT array-of-requests array of requests (array of handles)

OUT flag (logical) OUT array-of -statuses array of status objects (array of Status)

int MFI_Testall{int count, MPI-Request *array-of-requests, int *flag, MPI-Status *array_of_statuses)

MPI_TESTALL(C0lJtdT, ARRAY-OF -REQUESTS, FLAG, ARRAY_DF_STATLdSES, IERROR) LOGICAL FLAG

INTEGER COUNT, ARRAY-OF-REQUESTS ( **), ARRAY-OF-STATUSES(MPI.STATUS-SIZE,*), I IERROR

Returns flag = true if all communications associated with active handles in the array have completed (this includes the case where no handle in the list is ac tive). In this case, each status entry that corresponds to an active handle request is set to the status of the corresponding communication; if the request was allo cated by a nonblocking communication call then it is deallocated, and the handle is set to N1P1_REQUEST_I~UL.l.. Each status entry that corresponds to a null or inac tive handle is set to return tag = MPI~~IY_TAG, source = MPI-ANY-SOURCE, and is also configured so that calls to MPI_GET_COUNT and MPI_GET_ELEMENTS return count = 0. Otherwise, flag = false is returned, no request is modified and the values of the status entries are undefined. This is a local operation.

| | IN | | | | in count | length of array-of-requests (integer) | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | INOUT | | | | array_of_requests | array of requests (array of handles) | | | |
| | OUT | | | | OutCOUnt | number of completed requests (integer) | | | |
| | OUT | | | | array_Of_IndiCeS | array of indices of operations that completed | | | |

MPLvVA)TSOME(incount, array-of-requests, outcount, array-of-indices, array of_statuses) (array of integers) ’ OUT array_of_StatuseS array of status objects for operations that

completed (array of Status)

int MPT_Waitsome{int incount, MPI-Request *array_of~equests, int *outcount, int *array_of_indz.ces, MPI-Status *array_of_statuses)

MPI_WAITSOME(INCOUNT, ARRAY_OF~EQUESTS, OUTCOUNT, ARRAY-0F-INDICES, ARRAY.OF-STATUSES, IERROR) INTEGER INCOUNT, ARRAY_OF_REQUESTS(*), OUTCOUNT, ARRAY_OF_INDICES(*), ARRAY-0F-STATUSES (MP I-STATUS-SIZE , * ) , IERROR

Waits until at least one of the operations associated with active handles in the list have completed. Returns in outcount the number of requests from the list array-of -requests that have completed. Returns in the first outcount locations of the array array-of-indices the indices of these operations (index within the array array-of -requests; the array is indexed from zero in C and from one in Fortran). Returns in the first outcount locations of the array array-of-status the status for these completed operations. If a request that completed was allocated by a nonblocking communication call, then it is deallocated, and the associated handle is set to MPLREQUESTNULL.

’

If the list contains no active handles, then the call returns immediately with 
outcount = 0. 
MPI_TESTSOME(incount, array_of_requests, outcount, array.ofJndices, array 
of_statuses} 
IN incount length of array-of-requests (integer) 
INOLTT array-of -requests array of requests (array of handles) 
OUT outcount number of completed requests (integer) 
OUT array-of-I nd ices array of indices of operations that completed 
(array of integers) 
OUT array_of_statuses array of status objects for operations that . 
. completed (array of Status) 

int MPI_TestsomeCint incount, MPI-Request *array-of -requests, int *outcount, int *ax~ray_of_in~3ces, MPI-Status *array_of_statuses)

MPI-TESTSOME(INCOUNT, ARRAY_DF REQLTESTS, OUTCOUNT, ARRAY-OF-INDICES, 
ARRAY-OF-STATUSES, IERROR) , 
INTEGER INCOUNT, ARRAY-OF-REQUESTS(*), OUTCOUNT, ARR.AY_DF_INDICES(*), 
ARRAY~OF_STATUSES(MPI-STATUS-SIZE,*), IERROR 
Behaves like MPI-WAITSOME, except that it returns immediately. If no 
operation has completed it returns outcount = 0. 
MPI_TESTSOME is a local operation, which returns immediately, whereas 
MPI- WAITSOME will block until a communication completes, if it was passed a 
list that contains at least one active handle. Both calls fulfil a fairness require- 
ment : If a request for a receive repeatedly appears in a list of requests passed 
to MPI-WAITSOME or MPI_TESTSOME, and a matching send has been posted, 
then the receive will eventually succeed, unless the send is satisfied by another 
receive; and similarly for send requests. 

Advice to users. The use of MPI_TESTSOME is likely to be more efficient than the use of MPI_TESTANY. The former returns information on all completed communications, with the latter, a new call is required for each

.

### communication that completes.

A server with multiple clients can use MPI_WAITSOME so as not to starve any client. Clients send messages to the server with service requests.

The server calls MPI_WAITSOME with one receive request for each client, and then handles all receives that completed. If a call to MPI_WAITANY is used instead, then one client could starve while requests from another client always sneak in first. (End of advice to users.)

### Advice to implementors. MPLTESTSOME should complete as many pending communications as possible. (End of advice to irrcplernenxors.)

Example 3.14 Client-server code (starvation can occur).

CALL MPI_COMM_SIZE(comm, size, ierr) CALL MPI_COMM_RANK(comm, rank, ierr) IF(rank > 0) THEN ! client code

DO WHILE(.TRUE.)

. CALL MPI_ISEND(a, n, MPI_REAL, 0, tag, comm, request, ierr)

CALL MPI_WAIT(request, status, ierr)

END DO ELSE ! rank=0 -server code

DO i=l, size-1

CALL MPI.IRECV(ad.i), n, MPI_REAL, 0, tag, comm, request_list(i), ierr)

END DO 
DO WHILE(.TRUE.) 
CALL MPI-WAITANY(size-1, request_list, index, status, ierr) 
CALL DO-SERVICE(a(l,index)) ! handle one message 
CALL MPI_IRECV(a(l, index), n, MPI_REAL, 0, tag, 
comm, request_list(index), ierr) 

END DO

END IF

Example 3.15 Same code, using MPI_WAITSOME.

CALL MPI_COMM_SIZE(comm, size, ierr)

’

CALL MPI-COMM-RANK(comm, rank, ierr)

IF(rank > 0) THEN ! client code

DO WHILE(.TRUE.) CALL MPI_ISEND(a, n, MPI_REAL, 0, tag, comm, request, ierr)

CALL MPI-WAIT(request, status, ierr)

END DO ELSE ! rank=0 -- server code

DO i=l, size-1

CALL MPI_IRECV(a(l,i), n, MPI_REAL, 0, tag, comm, request_list(i), ierr)

END DO

DO WHILE(.TRUE.) CALL MPI_WAITSOME(size, request_list, numdone, index_list, status_list, ierr)

DO i=l, numdone

CALL DD_SERVICE(a(1, index_list(i))) CALL MPI-IRECV(a(l, index_list(i)), n, MPI_REAL, 0, tag, comm, request_list(i), ierr)

END DO END DO END IF

3.8 Probe and Cancel The NlPI_PROBE and MPI-IPROBE operations allow incoming messages to be checked for, without actually receiving them. The user can then decide how to receive them, based on the information returned by the probe (basically, the information returned by status). In particular, the user may allocate memory for the receive buffer, according to the length of the probed message. The MPI_CANCEL operation allows pending communications to be canceled. This is required for cleanup. Posting a send or a receive ties up user resources (send or receive buffers), and a cancel may be needed to free these resources

### gracefully.

M PI-I PROBE (source, tag, comm, flag, status) IN source source rank, or MPI-ANY-SOURCE (integer) iN tag tag value or MPI~1NY_TAG (integer) IN comm communicator (handle) OUT flag (logical) OUT status status object (Status)

int MPI-Iprobe(int source, int tag, MPI-Comm comm, int *flag, 
MPI-status *status) 
MPI_IPROBE(SOURCE, TAG, COMM, FLAG, STATUS, IERROR) 
LOGICAL FLAG 

INTEGER SOURCE, TAG, COMM, STATUS(MPI_STATUS_SIZE), IERROR

MPI-IPROBE(source, tag, comm, flag, status) returns flag = true if there is a message that can be received and that matches the pattern specified by the arguments source, tag, and comm. The call matches the same message that would have been received by a call to MPI_RECV(... , source, tag, comm, status) executed at the same point in the program, and returns in status the same value

that would have been returned by MPI_RECV~). Otherwise, the call returns flag = false., and leaves status undefined. If MPI-IPROBE returns flag = true, then the content of the status object can be subsequently accessed as described in Section 3.2.5 to find the source, tag and length of the probed message. A subsequent receive executed with the same context, and the source and tag returned in status by MPI-I PROBE will receive the message that was matched by the probe, if no other intervening receive occurs after the probe. If the receiving process is multi-threaded, it is the user’s responsibility to ensure that the last condition holds. The source argument of MPI_PROBE can be MPI-ANY-SOURCE, and the tag argument can be MPl~4NY_TAG, so that one can probe for messages from an ar bitrary source and/or with an arbitrary tag. However, a specific communication context must be provided with the comm argument. It is not necessary to receive a message immediately after it has been probed for, and the same message may be probed for several times before it is received.

_ MPI_PROBE~saurce, tag, comm, status) IN source source rank, or MPI-ANY-SOURCE (integer) IN tag tag value, or M Pl-ANY-TAG (integer) IN Comm communicator (handle) OUT status status object (Status)

int MPI-Probe(int source, int tag, ~fPI_Comm comm, MPI-Status *status) MPI-PROBE(SOURCE, TAG, COMM, STATUS, IERROR) INTEGER SOURCE, TAG, COMM, STATUS (MPI -STATUS -SIZE), IERROR _

MPLPROBE behaves like MPI_IPROBE except that it is a blocking call that returns only after a matching message has been found.

’

The MPI implementation of MPI_PROBE and MP1_IPROB’E needs to guaran tee progress: if a call to MPI_PROBE has been issued by a process, and a send that matches the probe has been initiated by some process, then the call to MPI-PROBE will return, unless the message is received by another concurrent receive operation (that is executed by another thread at the probing process). Similarly, if a process busy waits with MPI-IPROBE and a matching message has been issued, then the call to MPI-IPROBE will eventually return flag = true unless the message is received by another concurrent receive operation. _ In

Example 3.16 Use blocking probe to wait for an incoming message. CALL MPI-COMM-RANK(comm, rank, ierr) .

IF (rank . EQ . 0 ) THEN CALL MPI-SEND(i, 1, MPI_INTEGER, 2, 0, comm, ierr)

ELSE IF(rank.Eq.1) THEN

CALL MPI_SEND(x, 1, MPI_REAL, 2, 0, comm, ierr) ELSE ! rank.Eq.2 DO i=1, 2

’

-CALL MPI-PROBE(MPI-ANY-SOURCE, 0, comm, status, ierr) IF (status(MPI_SOURCE) = 0) THEN 100 CALL MPI-RECV(i, 1, MPI_INTEGER, 0, 0, status, ierr)

ELSE

200 CALL MPI_RECV(x, 1, MPI_REAL, 1, 0, status, ierr)

END IF END DO END IF

Each message is received with the right type.

Example 3.17 A similar program to the previous example, but now it has a

### problem.

CALL MPI_COMM_RANK(comm, rank, ierr)

IF (rank.EO.O) THEN CALL MPI_SEND(i, 1, MPI_INTEGER, 2, 0, comm, ierr) _

ELSE IF(rank.Eq.1) THEN

CALL MPI_SEND(x, 1, MPI_REAL, 2, 0, comm, ierr)

ELSE

DO i=l, 2 CALL MPI_PROBE(MPI.ANY_SOURCE, 0, ,. comm, status, ierr) IF (status(MPI_SOURCE) = 0) THEN 100 CALL MPI_RECVCi, 1, MPI_INTEGER, MPI_ANY_SDUR.CE, 0, status, ierr)

ELSE 200 CALL MPI_RECV(x, 1, MPI_REAL, MPI_ANY_SOURCE, 0, status, ierr) END IF . END DO _ END IF

We slightly modified example 3.16, using MPI-ANY-SOURCE as the source ar gument in the two receive calls in statements labeled 100 and 200. The program is now incorrect: the receive operation may receive a message that is distinct from the message probed by the preceding call to MPI_PROBE.

Advice to implementors. A call to MPLPROBE(source, tag, comm, status) will match the message that would have been received by a call to MPI_RECV(... , source, tag, comm, status) executed at the same point. Suppose that this

message has source s, tag t and communicator c. If the tag argument in the probe call has value MPI-ANY-TAG then the message probed will be the earliest pending message from source s with communicator c and any tag; in any case, the message probed will be the earliest pending message from source s with tag t and communicator c (this is the message that would have been received, so as to preserve message order). This message continues as the earliest pending message from source s with tag t and communicator c, until it is received. A receive operation subsequent to the probe that uses the same communicator as the probe and uses the tag and source values returned by the probe, must receive this message, unless it has already been

#### received by another receive operation. (End of advice to implerrcentors.) MPI_CANCEL(request~

IN request communication request (handle) 
int MPI_Cancel(MPI_Request *request) 
MPI_CANCEL(REQUEST, IERROR) 
INTEGER REQUEST, IERROR 

A call to MP!_CANCEL marks for cancellation a pending, nonblocking com munication operation (send or receive). The cancel call is local. It returns immediately, possibly before the communication is actually canceled. It is still necessary to complete a communication that has been marked for cancellation, using a call to MPI_REQUEST_FREE, MPI_WAIT or MPI_TEST (or any of the de rived operations). If a communication is marked for cancellation, then a MPI_WAIT call for that communication is guaranteed to return, irrespective of the activities of other processes (i.e., MPI_WAIT behaves as a local function); similarly if MPI_TEST is repeatedly called in a busy wait loop for a canceled communication, then MPI_TEST will eventually be successful.

MPI_CANCEL can be used to cancel a communication that uses a persistent 
request (see Section 3.9), in the same way it is used for nonpersistent requests. 
A successful cancellation cancels the active communication, but not the request 
itself. After the call to MPI_CANCEL and the subsequent call to MPI_WAIT or 
MPLTEST, the request becomes inactive and can be activated for a new commu 
nication. 
The successful cancellation of a buffered send frees the buffer space occu 

pied by the pending message. Either the cancellation succeeds, or the communication succeeds, but not both. If a send is marked for cancellation, then it must be the case that either the send completes normally, in which case the message sent was received at the destination process, or that the send is successfully canceled, in which case no part of the message was received at the destination. Then, any matching receive has to be satisfied by another send. If a receive is marked for cancellation, then it must be the case that either the receive completes normally, or that the receive is successfully canceled, in which case no part of the receive buffer is altered. Then, any matching send has to be satisfied by another receive. If the operation has been canceled, then information to that effect will be returned in the status argument of the operation that completes the communi cation.

##### MPI-TEST-CANCELLED(status, flag) ~P~~ status status object (Status) OUT flag (logical)

int MPI_Test_cancel~.edCMPT_Status *status, int *flag) 
MPI_TEST_CANCELLED(STAT~S, FLAG, IERROR) 
LOGICAL FLAG 
INTEGER STATUS(MPI_STATUS_SIZE), IERROR 

Returns flag = true if the communication associated with the status object was canceled successfully. In such a case, all other fields of status (such as count or tag) are undefined. Returns flag = false, otherwise. If a receive operation might be canceled then one should call MPI-TEST-CANCELLED first, to check whether the operation was canceled, before checking on the other fields of the return status.

Advice to users. Cancel can be an expensive operation that should be used only exceptionally. (End of advice to users.)

Advice to implementors. If a send operation uses an &dquo;eager&dquo; protocol (data is transferred to the receiver before a matching receive is posted), then the cancellation of this send may require communication with the intended re ceiver in order to free allocated buffers. On some systems this may require an interrupt to the intended receiver. Note that, while communication may be needed to implement MPLCANCEL, this is still a local operation, since its completion does not depend on the code executed by other processes. If processing is required on another process, this should be transparent to the application (hence the need for an interrupt and an interrupt han

#### dler). (End of advice to implementors.)

3.9 Persistent Communication Requests Often a communication with the same argument list is repeatedly executed within the inner loop of a parallel computation. In such a situation, it may be possible to optimize the communication by binding the list of communication arguments to a persistent communication request once and, then, repeatedly using the request to initiate and complete messages. The persistent request thus created can be thought of as a communication port or a &dquo;half-channel.&dquo; It does

not provide the full functionality of a conventional channel, since there is no binding of the send port to the receive port. This construct allows reduction of the overhead for communication between the process and communication controller, but not of the overhead for communication between one commu nication controller and another. It is not necessary that messages sent with a persistent request be received by a receive operation using a persistent request, or vice versa.

A persistent communication request is created using one of the four follow ing calls. These calls involve no communication.

##### MPI_SEND_INIT(buf, count, datatype, dest, tag, comm, request)

IN buf initial address of send buffer (choice) IN CoUnt number of elements sent (integer) iN datatype type of each element (handle) IN dest rank of destination (integer) IN tag message tag (integer) IN Comm communicator (handle) -OUT request communication request (handle)

int MPI~end_init {noid* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI-Request *request)

MPI-SEND-INIT(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER REQUEST, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR

° .

Creates a persistent communication request for a standard mode send op eration, and binds to it all the arguments of a send operation.

##### MPI_BSEND_INIT(buf, count, datatype, dest, tag, comm, request)

IN- buf

’

initial address of send buffer (choice) M COUnt number of elements sent (integer) t,N datatype type of each element (handle) _ IN dest rank of destination (integer) ~ tag message tag (integer) IN comm communicator (handle) OUT request communication request (handle)

int MPI-Bsend-init(void* buf, int count, MPI~atatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI-Comm comm, l4PI-Request *request)

MPI-BSEND-INIT(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR)

-

 BUF(*)

r

INTEGER REQUEST, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR

Creates a persistent communication request for a buffered mode send.

#### MPI_SSEND_INITdbuf, count, datatype, dest, tag, comm, request)

,I~~J buf initial address of send buffer (choice) oi CoUnt number of elements sent (integer) IN datatype type of each element (handle) IN dest rank of destination (integer) IN tag message tag (integer) IN comm communicator (handle) OUT request communication request (handle)

int MPI_Ssend_init(void* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI-Request *request)

MPI-SSEND-INIT(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR Creates a persistent communication object for a synchronous mode send operation. MPI_RSEND_INIT~buf, count, datatype, dest, tag, comm, request) IN&dquo; buf initial address of send buffer (choice) Rq COUnt number of elements sent (integer) IN datatype type of each element (handle) M dest rank of destination (integer) 1M tag message tag (integer) IN comm communicator (handle) OUT request ~ communication request (handle)

int MFI~taend_init(void* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI~i.equest *request)

MPI-RSEND-INIT(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR

### Creates a persistent communication object for a ready mode send operation.

#### MPI_RECV_iNIT(buf, count, datatype, source, tag, comm, request)

’

OUT buf initial address of receive buffer (choice) IN count number of elements received (integer) IN, datatype type of each element (handle) iN source rank of source or MPIfiNYISOURCE (integer)

IN tag message tag or MPI~1NY_TAG (integer) fI‘~ Comm communicator (handle) OL’T request communication request (handle)

int MPIJRecv_init(void* buf, int count, MPI~atatype datatype, int source, 
int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI-Request *request) 
MPI-RECV-INIT(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, SOURCE, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) 
 BUF(*) . 
INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, SOURCE, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR 

Creates a persistent communication request for a receive operation. The argument buf is marked as OUT because the user gives permission to write on the receive buffer by passing the argument to MPLRECV-INIT. A persistent communication request is inactive after it was created-no active

communication is attached to the request. 
A communication (send or receive) that uses a persistent request is initiated 
by the function MPI_START. 

##### M PI_START(request~

INOUT request communication request (handle)

int MPI_Start(MPI_Request *request) MPI-START(REQUEST, IERROR) INTEGER REQUEST, IERROR

The argument, request, is a handle returned by one of the previous five calls. 
The associated request should be inactive. The request becomes active once the 
call is made. 
If the request is for a send with ready mode, then a matching receive should 
be posted before the call is made. The communication buffer should not be 

accessed after the call, and until the operation completes. The call is local, with similar semantics to the nonblocking communication operations described in Section 3.7. That is, a call to MPI_START with a request created by MPI_SEND_INIT starts a communication in the same manner as a call to MPLISEND; a call to MPI_START with a request created by MPI_BSEND_INIT starts a communication in the same manner as a call to MPI-IBSEND; and so on.

##### MPI._.STARTALL(count, array-of-requests) IN count list length (integer) INOUT array-of-requests array of requests (array of handle)

int MPI_Startall(int count, MPI-Request *array_of_requests)

MPI_STARTALL(COUNT, ARRAY.OFJtEQUESTS, IERRDR) INTEGER COUNT, ARRAY_OF_REQUESTS(*), IERROR

Start all communications associated with requests in array-of-requests. A call to MPI_STARTALL(eount, array_of_requests) has the same effect as calls to . MPI_START (ba rray-of-req uests [I] ) , executed for i=0 ,... , count-1, in some arbi-

’

trary order. A communication started with a call to MPI_START or MPI_STARTALL is completed by a call to MPI_WAIT, MPI_TEST, or one of the derived functions described in Section 3.7.5. The request becomes inactive after successful com pletion of such call. The request is not deallocated and it can be activated anew by an MPLSTART or MPI_STARTALL call.

A persistent request is deallocated by a call to MPI_REQUEST_FREE (Sec tion 3.7.3). The call to MPI_REQUEST_FREE can occur at any point in the program after the persistent request was created. However, the request will be deallocated only after it becomes inactive. Active receive requests should not be freed. Otherwise, it will not be possible to check that the receive has completed. It is preferable, in general, to free requests when they are inactive. If this rule is followed, then the functions described in this section will be invoked in a sequence of the form, Create (Start Complete)* Frees, where * indicates zero or more repetitions. If the same communication object is used in several concurrent threads, it is the user’s responsibility to coordinate calls so that the correct sequence is obeyed. A send operation initiated with MP1_START can be matched with any receive operation and, likewise, a receive operation initiated with M PI_START can receive messages generated by any send operation.

3.10 Send-receive The send-receive operations combine in one call the sending of a message to one destination and the receiving of another message, from another process. The two (source and destination) are possibly the same. A send-receive operation is very useful for executing a shift operation across a chain of processes. If blocking sends and receives are used for such a shift, then one needs to order the sends and receives correctly (for example, even processes send, then receive, odd processes receive first, then send) so as to prevent cyclic dependencies that may lead to deadlock. When a send-receive operation is used, the communication subsystem takes care of these issues. The send-receive operation can be used in conjunction with the functions described in Chapter 6 in order to perform shifts on various logical topologies. Also, a send-receive operation is useful for implementing remote procedure calls. ,

A message sent by a send-receive operation can be received by a regular receive operation or probed by a probe operation; a send-receive operation can receive a message sent by a regular send operation.

MPI_SENDRECV(sendbuf, sendcount, sendtype, dest, sendtag, recvbuf, recv count, recvtype, source, recvtag, comm, status)

IN sendbuf initial address of send buffer (choice) IN sendcount number of elements in send buffer (integer) IN sendtype type of elements in send buffer (handle) IN dest rank of destination (integer) IN sendtag send tag (integer) -

OUT recvbuf initial address of receive buffer (choice) 
IN recvcount number of elements in receive buffer (integer) 
IN recvtype type of elements in receive buffer (handle) 
IN source rank of source (integer) 
IN recvtag receive tag (integer) 
IN comm communicator (handle) 

-

OUT status status object (Status)

int MPI-Sendrecv(void *sendbuf, int sendcount, MPI-Datatype sendtype, 
int dest, int sendtag, void *recvbuf, int recvcount, 
MPI-Datatype recvtype, int source, MPI~atatype recvtag, 
MPI_Comm comm, MPI-Status *status) 
MPI-SENDRECV(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, DEST, SENDTAG, RECVBUF, 
RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, SOURCE, RECVTAG, COMM, STATUS, IERROR) 
 SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) 
INTEGER SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, DEST, SENDTAG, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, SOURCE, 
RECVTAG, COMM, STATUS (MPI -STATUS -SIZE), IERROR 

Execute a blocking send and receive operation. Both send and receive use the same communicator, but possibly different tags. The send buffer and receive buffers must be disjoint, and may have different lengths and datatypes.

MPI-SENDRECV-REPLACE(buf, count, datatype, dest, sendtag, source, recvtag, comm, status)

-

INOUT buf initial address of send and receive buffer (choice) IN count number of elements in send and receive buffer

(integer) IN datatype - type of elements in send and receive buffer (han dle) -IN dest rank of destination (integer) IN sendtag send message tag (integer) IN SOUrCe _ rank of source (integer)

’

IN recvtag receive message tag (integer) IN comm communicator (handle) OUT status status object (Status) ,

int MPI-Sendrecv-replace(void* buf, int count, MPIJDatatype datatype, 
, int dest, int sendtag, int source, int recvtag, 
MPI-Comm comm, MPI-Status *status) 
I~fPT_SENDRECV~EPLACE(BTJF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, SENDTAG, SOURCE, RECVTAG, 
COMM, STATUS, IERROR) 
 BUF(*) 
INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, SENDTAG, SOURCE, RECVTAG, CCMMHt, 
STATUS (MPI -STATUS -SIZE), IERROR 
Execute a blocking send and receive. The same buffer is used both for the 
send and for the receive, so that the message sent is replaced by the message 
received. 
The semantics of a send-receive operation is what would be obtained if the 
caller forked two concurrent threads, one to execute the send, and one to exe 
cute the receive, followed by a join of these two threads. 
Advice to implementors. Additional intermediate buffering is needed for the 

### &dquo;replace&dquo; variant. (End af ctr.lv~ce to im~le~ntars.)

3. &dquo;~ 1 Null Processes -

In many instances, it is convenient to specify a &dquo;dummy&dquo; source or destination for communication. This simplifies the code that is needed for dealing with boundaries, for example, in the case of a non-circular shift done with calls to send-receive. The special value MPI-PROC-NULL can be used instead of a rank wherever a source or a destination argument is required in a call. A communication with process MPI_PROC_NULL has no effect. A send to MPI_PROC_NULL succeeds and returns as soon as possible. A receive from MP1_PROC_NULL succeeds and returns as soon as possible with no modifications to the receive buffer. When a receive with source = MPI_PROC_NULL is executed then the status object returns source = MPI-PROC-NULL, tag = MPI-ANY-TAG and count = 0.

3.12 Derived Datatypes Up to here, all point-to-point communications have involved only contiguous buffers containing a sequence of elements of the same type. This is too con straining on two accounts. One often wants to pass messages that contain values

&dquo;

with different datatypes (e.g., an integer count, followed by a sequence of real numbers); and one often wants to send noncontiguous data (e.g., a sub-block of a matrix). One solution is to pack noncontiguous data into a contiguous buffer at the sender site and unpack it back at the receiver site. This has the dis advantage of requiring additional memory-to-memory copy operations at both sites, even when the communication subsystem has scatter-gather capabilities.

Instead, MPI provides mechanisms to specify more general, mixed, and non contiguous communication buffers. It is up to the implementation to decide whether data should be first packed in a contiguous buffer before being trans mitted, or whether it can be collected directly from where it resides. The general mechanisms provided here allow one to transfer directly, with out copying, objects of various shape and size. It is not assumed that the MPI library is cognizant of the objects declared in the host language. Thus, if one wants to transfer a structure, or an array section, it will be necessary to provide in MPI a definition of a communication buffer that mimics the definition of the structure or array section in question. These facilities can be used by library de signers to define communication functions that can transfer objects defined in the host language-by decoding their definitions as available in a symbol table or a dope vector. Such higher-level communication functions are not part of MPI. More general communication buffers are specified by replacing the basic datatypes that have been used so far with derived datatypes that are constructed from basic datatypes using the constructors described in this section. These methods of constructing derived datatypes can be applied recursively. A general datatype is an opaque object that specifies two things: w A sequence of basic datatypes w A sequence of integer (byte) displacements The displacements are not required to be positive, distinct, or in increasing order. Therefore, the order of items need not coincide with their order in store, and an item may appear more than once. We call such a pair of sequences (or sequence of pairs) a type map. The sequence of basic datatypes (displacements ignored) is the type signature of the datatype. Let

Tj~ema~a = {(~o. disp~,), ... , (typen-l, dis,~~_1)}, be such a type map, where type, are basic types, and disp; are displacements. Let Typesig = {ly~eo, ... , ty~e.,~_i I

be the associated type signature. This type map, together with a base address b~c~; specifies a communication buffer: the communication buffer that consists of n entries, where the Mh entry is at address buf + disp, and has type type2:. A message assembled from such a communication buffer will consist of n values, of the types defined by Typesig. We can use a handle to a general datatype as an argument in a send or receive operation, instead of a basic datatype argument. The operation MPI_SEND(buf, 1, datatype,...) will use the send buffer defined by the base address buf and the general datatype associated with datatype; it will generate a message with the type signature determined by the datatype argument. MPI_RECV(buf, 1,

datatype,... ) will use the receive buffer defined by the base address buf and the general datatype associated with datatype. General datatypes can be used in all send and receive operations. We discuss, in Section 3.12.5, the case where the second argument count has value > 1.

The basic datatypes presented in Section 3.2.2 are particular cases of a gen eral datatype, and are predefined. Thus, MPI_INT is a predefined handle to a datatype with type map {(int, 0)}, with one entry of type int and displacement zero. The other basic datatypes are similar. The extent of a datatype is defined to be the span from the first byte to the last byte occupied by entries in this datatype, rounded up to satisfy alignment requirements. That is, if

### Typemap = {(type~, dispc,), ... , (type~_i, dispn_,)},

then

16( Tjpemap) = min dispj, i 
ub(TypemaP) = max(disp~ + sizeof (t)pej)), and 
i 
extent(Typemap) - ub(T)pemap) - lb(Typem.ap) + E. (3.1) 
If type2 requires alignment to a byte address that is is a multiple of k;, then c is 
the least nonnegative increment needed to round extent(Typemap) to the next 

multiple of max, kz.

Example 3.18 Assume that Type = [(double, 0), (char, 8)} (a double at displacement zero, followed by a char at displacement eight). Assume, furthermore, that doubles have to be strictly aligned at addresses that are multiples of eight. Then, the extent of this datatype is 16 (9 rounded to the next multiple of 8). A datatype that consists of a character immediately followed by a double will also have an extent of 16.

Rationale. The definition of extent is motivated by the assumption that the amount of padding added at the end of each structure in an array of structures is the least needed to fulfill alignment constraints. More explicit control of the extent is provided in Section 3.12.3. Such explicit control is needed in cases where the assumption does not hold, for example, where union types are used. (End of rati~nale.)

3.12.1 DATATYPE CONSTRUCTORS

Contiguous The simplest datatype constructor is MPLTYPE-CONTIGUOUS which allows replication of a datatype into contiguous locations.

##### MPI-TYPE-CONTIGUOUS(count, oldtype, newtype)

.

IN count replication count (nonnegative integer) IN oldtype old datatype (handle) ,

’

OUT newtype new datatype (handle)

int MPI_Type_contiguous(int count, MPI-Datatype oldtype, MP’I.~atatype *newtype)

’

MPI_TYPE_CONTIGUOUS(COUNT, OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR) INTEGER COUNT, OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR

#### newtype is the datatype obtained by concatenating count copies of oldtype. Concatenation is defined using extent as the size of the concatenated copies.

Example 3.19 Let oldtype have type map {(double. 0), (char, 8)}, with extent 16, and let count = 3. The type map of the datatype returned by newtype is

{(double. 0). (char. 8), (double, 16), (char, 24), (double, 32), (char, 40)};

i.e., alternating double and char elements, with displacements 0, 8, 16, 24, 32, 40.

In general, assume that the type map of oldtype is

- i

### with extent ex. Then newtype has a type map with count n entries defined by:

Vector The function MPI_TYPE_VECTOR is a more general constructor that allows replication of a datatype into locations that consist of equally spaced blocks. Each block is obtained by concatenating the same number of copies of the old datatype. The spacing between blocks is a multiple of the extent of the

## old datatype.

#### MP1_TYPE_VECTOR{ count, blocklength, stride, oldtype, newtype)

’

1M count number of blocks (nonnegative integer) IN blocklength number of elements in each block (nonnegative integer) I~ stride number of elements between start of each block

(integer)

##### IN oldtype

’ old datatype (handle) OUT newtype new datatype (handle)

.

-

int MPI_Type_vector(int count, int blocklength, int stride, .

MPI-Datatype oldtype, MPI~atatype *newtype)

MPI_TYPE_VECTOR(COUNT, BLOCKLENGTH, STRIDE, OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR) INTEGER COUNT, BLOCKLENGTH, STRIDE, OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR

Example 3.20 Assume, again, that oldtype has type map { (double, 0), (char, 8) }, with extent 16. Acall to MPI_TYPE_VECTOR( 2, 3, 4, oldtype, newtype) will create the datatype with type map, .

{(double, 0), (char, 8). (double, 16), (char, 24), (double, 32), (char, 40), (double, 64), (char, 72), (double, 80), (char, 88), (double, 96), (char, 104)}.

That is, two blocks with three copies each of the old type, with a stride of 4 elements (4 ~ 16 bytes) between the blocks.

Example 3.21 A call to MPLTYPE-VECTOR(3, 1, -2, oldtype, newtype) will cre

### ate the datatype,

{(double, 0), (char, 8), (double, -32), (char, -24), (double, -64), (char, -56)}.

In general, assume that oldtype has type map,

’

#### {(ty~e~, dispo), ... , (typen-1’ (,~2S~Jn_y)},

’

with extent ex. Let bl be the blocklength. The newly created datatype has a type

map with count. bl - n entries:

A call to MPI_TYPE_CONTiGUOUS(count, oldtype, newtypey is equivalent to a call to MPI_TYPE_VECTOR(count, 1, 1, oldtype, newtype), or to a call to

### MPI_TYPE_VECTOR(1, count, n, oldtype, newtype), n arbitrary.

Hvector The function MPI-TYPE-HVECTOR is identical to MPI_TYPE_VECTOR, except that stride is given in bytes, rather than in elements. The use for both types of vector constructors is illustrated in Section 3.12.7. (H stands for &dquo;het

### erogeneous&dquo;).

MPLTYPE-HVECTOR( count, blocklength, stride, oldtype, newtype) IN count number of blocks (nonnegative integer) IN blocklength number of elements in each block (nonnegative integer) IN stride number of bytes between start of each block (in teger) IN oldtype old datatype (handle) OUT newtype new datatype (handle)

int MPI-Type-hvector(int count, int blocklength, MPI-Aint stride,

MPI-Datatype oldtype, MPI~3atatype *newtype)

MPI-TYPEJHVECTOR(COUNT, BLDCKLENGTH, STRIDE, DLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERRDR) INTEGER COUNT, BLOCKLENGTH, STRIDE, OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERRDR

### Assume that oldtype has type map, i(typeo, dispo) , ... , (type,,-,, dis,~,r-y},

with extent ex. Let bl be the blocklength. The newly created datatype has a type map with count. bl - ?i entries:

Indexed The function MPI_TYPE_INDEXED allows replication of an old data type into a sequence of blocks (each block is a concatenation of the old datatype), where each block can contain a different number of copies and have a different displacement. All block displacements are multiples of the old type extent.

#### MPI_TYPEJNDEXED( count, array-of-blocklengths, array-of-displacements, oldtype, newtype)

IN count number of blocks - also number of entries in

array-of-displacements and array-of-block lengths (nonnegative integer) .R~ array_of_blocklengths number of elements per block (array of nonneg ative integers)

IN array-of -displacements displacementfor each block, in multiples of old

type extent (array of integer) IN oldtype old datatype (handle)

’

OUT newtype new datatype (handle)

int MPI_Type_indexed(int count, int *array_of_blocklengths, 
int *array_of_displacements, MPI~atatype oldtype, 
MPI-Datatype *newtype) 
MPI_TYPE_INDEXED(COUNT, ARRAY_OFJ3LOCKLENGTHS, ARRAY_OF~ISPLACEMENTS, 
OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR) 
INTEGER COUNT, ARRAY-DF-BLDCKLENGTHS ( * ) , ARRAY-OF-DISPLACEMENTS(*), 
OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR 

Example 3.22 Let oldtype have type map [(double, 0), (char, 8)}, with extent 16. Let B = (3, 1) and let D = (4, 0). A call to MPI_TYPE_INDEXED(2, B, D, oldtype, newtype) returns a datatype with type map,

, {(double, 64), (char, 72). (double, 80), (char, 88), (double, 96), (char, 104), (double, 0), (char, 8)}. That is, three copies of the old type starting at displacement 64, and one copy starting at displacement 0. In general, assume that oldtype has type map, ,

### {(type~, dis~), ... , (typen_~, disp.-,)),

with extent e.x. Let B be the array_of_blocklength argument and D be the array_of_displacements argument. The newly created datatype has yeount- n. 1 B[i] entries: _1=0 I entnes:

A call to MPI_TYPE_VECTOR(count, blocklength, stride, oldtype, newtype) is equivalent to a call to MPI_TYPE_INDEXED(count, B, D, oldtype, newtype) where D[j] = j . stride, j = 0, ... , count - 1,

and

B[j] = blocklength, j = 0, ... , count - 1.

Hindexed The function MPI_TYPE_HINDE?CED is identical to MPI_TYPE_

##### INDEXED, except that block displacements in array-of-displacements are speci fied in bytes, rather than in multiples of the oldtype extent.

##### MPI_TYPE_HINDEXED( count, array-of-blocklengths, array-of-displacements, oldtype, newtype)

IN count number of blocks-also number of entries in

array_of_displacements and array-of-block lengths (integer) 1N array_Of _bloCklengthS number of elements in each block (array of non

negative integers) ! array_of_displaCe- byte displacementof each block (array of integer) . ments IN oldtype old datatype (handle) OUT newtype new datatype (handle)

int MPIJTypeJiindexed(int count, int *array_of_blocklengths,

MPI-Aint *array_of_displacements, MPI-Datatype oldtype, &dquo; 
MPI~atatype *newtype) 
MPI-TYPE-HINDEXED (COUNT, ARRAY_OF~3LOC£SLENGT~TS, ARAAY_OF~ISPLACEMENTS, 
OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR) . 
INTEGER COUNT, ARRAY_OFJBLOCKLENGTHS(*), ARRAY-OF-DISPLACEMENTS(*), 
OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR 
Assume that oldtype has type map, 

with extent ex. Let B be the array-of-blocklength argument and D be the array-of_displacements argument. The newly created datatype has a type map with WIt n . n ~eo~~nt-1 1 B[il ,~ntr.ies: Li=O I entnes:

Struct MPI_TYPE_STRUCT is the most general type constructor. It further gen eralizes the previous one in that it allows each block to consist of replications of

different datatypes. 
MPI-TYPE-STRUCT(count, array-of-blocklengths, array-of-displacements, 
array-of-types, newtype) 

IN count number of blocks (integer) - also number of en

tries in arrays array-of.types, array-of -displace ments and array-of-blocklengths IN array-of-blocklength number of elements in each block (array of inte

ger) 
IN array_of_displaee- bytedisplacement of each block (array ofinteger) 
ments 
IN array-of-types type of elements in each block (array of handles 

to datatype objects) OUT newtype new datatype (handle)

int MPI_Type_struct(int count, int *array_of_blocklengths, MPI_Aint *array_of_displacements, MPI-Datatype *array_of_types, MPI-Datatype *newtype)

M>°7I_TYPE_STRUC’I(COUNT, ARRAY_flF~LOCKLENGTHS, ARRAY_OF~ISPLACEMENTS, ARRAY_OF_TYPES, NE’~ITYPE, IERROR) INTEGER COUNT, ARRAY J3F-BLOCKLENGTHSC*), ARRAY.OFJ3ISPLACEMENTS(*), ARRAY_OF_TYPES(*), NEWTYPE, IERROR

Example 3.23 Let type1 have type map, {(double, 0), (char, 8)},

with extent 16. Let B = (2, 1, 3), D = (0, 16, 26), and T = (MPI-FLOAI typel, MPI_CHARy. Then a call to MPI_TYPE_STRUCT{3, B, D, T, newtype) returns a

datatype with type map,

[(float, 0), (float, 4), (double, 16), (char, 24), (char, 26), (char, 27), (char, 28)}.

### That is, two copies of MPLPLOAT starting at 0, followed by one copy of type1 1 starting at 16, followed by three copies of MPLCHAR, starting at 26. (We assume that a float occupies four bytes.)

In general, let T be the array-of-types argument, where T[i] is a handle to, with extent ext. Let B be the array-of-blocklength argument and D be the ar ray-of-displacements argument. Let c be the count argument. Then the newly created datatype has a type map with ~G ~ B[iJ - ni entries:

A call to MPI-TYPE-HINDEXED( count, B, D, oldtype, newtype) is equivalent to a call to MPI_TYPE_STRUGT( count, B, D, T, newtype), where each entry of T

##### is equal to oldtype.

3.12.2 ADDRESS AND EXTENT FUNCTIONS

The displacements in a general datatype are relative to some initial buffer ad dress. Absolute addresses can be substituted for these displacements: we treat - them as displacements relative to &dquo;address zero,&dquo; the start of the address space. This initial address zero is indicated by the constant MPI_BOTTOM. Thus, a data type can specify the absolute address of the entries in the communication buffer, in which case the buf argument is passed the value MPI_BOTTOM. The address of a location in memory can be found by invoking the function MPIADDRESS. MPL~4DDFtESS(location, address) IN location , location in caller memory (choice) OUT address address of location (integer)

int MPI-Address(void* location, MPI-Aint *address) 
MPI~4DDRESS(LOCATIDN, ADDRESS, IERROR) 
 LOCATION(*) 
INTEGER ADDRESS, IERROR 
Returns the (byte) address of location. 

Example 3.24 Using MPI-ADDRESS for an array.

REAL A(100,100) INTEGER I1, 12, DIFF CALL MPI_ADDRESS(A(1,1), I1, IERROR) CALL MPI_ADDRESS(A(10,i0), 12, IERROR) DIFF = 12 - Il ! The value of DIFF is 909*sizeofreal; the values of I1 and 12 are ’ implementation dependent.

Advice to users. C users may be tempted to avoid the usage of M PLADDRESS and rely on the availability of the address operator &. Note, however, that & cast-expression is a pointer, not an address. ANSI C does not require that the value of a pointer (or the pointer cast to int) be the absolute address of the object pointed at-although this is commonly the case.

Furthermore, referencing may not have a unique definition on machines . with a segmented address space. The use of MPI-ADDRESS to &dquo;reference&dquo;

### C variables guarantees portability to such machines as well. (End of advice to users.)

The following auxiliary functions provide useful information on derived

## datatypes.

MPI_TYPE_EXTENT~datatype, extent) IN datatype datatype (handle) OUT extent datatype extent (integer)

int MPI_Type_extent(MPIJ3atatype datatype, int MPI-Aint *extent)

MPI-TYPE-EXTENT(DATATYPE, EXTENT, IERROR) INTEGER DATATYPE, EXTENT, IERROR

Returns the extent of a datatype, where extent is as defined in Eq. 3.1 on

page 233.

MPLTYPE_S)ZE(datatype, size) Tl~’ datatype datatype (handle) OUT size datatype size (integer)

int MPI-Type-size(MPI-Datatype datatype, int MPI-Aint *size) 
MPI_TYPE_SIZE(DATATYPE, SIZE, IERROR) 
INTEGER DATATYPE, SIZE, IERROR 

MPI-TYPE-SIZE returns the total size, in bytes, of the entries in the type signature associated with datatype; i.e., the total size of the data in a message that would be created with this datatype. Entries that occur multiple times in the datatype are counted with their multiplicity. MPLTYPE_COUNT{datatype, count) ,

IN datatype datatype (handle) OUT COUnt datatype count (integer)

int MPI-Type-count(MPI-Datatype datatype, int *count) MPI-TYPE-CDUNT(DATATYPE, COUNT, IERROR) INTEGER DATATYPE, COUNT, IERRDR

## Returns the number of &dquo;top-level&dquo; entries in the datatype.

3.12.3 LOWER-BOUND AND UPPER-BOUND MARKERS It is often convenient to define explicitly the lower bound and upper bound of a type map, and override the definition given by Equation 3.1 on page 233. This allows one to define a datatype that has &dquo;holes&dquo; at its beginning or its end, or a datatype with entries that extend above the upper bound or below the lower bound. Examples of such usage are provided in Section 3.12.7. To achieve this, we add two additional &dquo;pseudo-datatypes,&dquo; MPLLB and MPl_UB, that can be used, respectively, to mark the lower bound or the upper bound of a datatype. These pseudo-datatypes occupy no space (extent(MP1_LB) = exten.t(MPP_UB) - 0). They do not affect the size or count of a datatype, and do not affect the content of a message created with this datatype. However, they do affect the definition of the extent of a datatype and, therefore, affect the outcome of a replication of this datatype by a datatype constructor. Example 3.25 Let D = (-3, 0, 6); T = (MPI_LB, MPUNT, MPI_UB), and B = (1, 1, 1 ). Then a call to MPI_TYPE_STRUCT(3, B, D, T, type1 ) creates a new datatype that has an extent of 9 (from -3 to 5, 5 included), and contains an integer at displacement 0. This is the datatype defined by the sequence ((Ib, -3), (int, 0), (ub, fi)} . If this type is replicated twice by a call to MPI_TYPE_CONTIGUOUS(2, typel, type2) then the newly created type can be described by the sequence

f(lb, -3), (int, 0), (int,9), (ub, 15)} . (Entries of type lb or ub can be deleted if they are not at the end-points of the datatype.) In general, if

T)Pemap = {(ty~e~, dis~E~) ... , (typen-l, dis~&dquo;_I)}, 
then the lower bound of Typema~ is defined to be 

¡

minj dis~b~ if no entry

### lb(TypemaP) =

~ minj(di# ~ such that !jpq = 16 ) has basic type Ib minl{dis~l such that typej = lbl otherwise Similarly, the upper bound of T)pentap is defined to be max~~+~MO/’(~~) if no entry ub(TypemaP) = ~ maxj( díSpj + sízeof(tJP’1) = ub) has basic type ub maxjtdlspj such that typf1&dquo; = ub} otherwise Then extent( TypemaP) = ub(T)pemap) - lb(Ty~emap) + E If typei requires alignment to a byte address that is a multiple of ki, then 6 is the least nonnegative increment needed to round extent( TypemaP) to the next multiple of max, hi. The formal definitions given for the various datatype constructors apply now, with the amended definition of extent. The two functions below can be used for finding the lower bound and the upper bound of a datatype. MPLTYPE_LB( datatype, displacement) IN datatype datatype (handle) OUT displacement displacement of lower bound from origin, in bytes (integer) int MPI_Type__Lb(fi~PI~atatype datatype, int* MPI-Aint displacement) MPI-TYPE-LB( DATATYPE, DISPLACEMENT, IERROR) INTEGER DATATYPE, DISPLACEMENT, IERROR

#### MPI_TYPE_UB( datatype, displacement)

IN datatype datatype (handle) OUT displacement displacement ofupperboundfrom origin, in bytes (integer) int MPI-Type-ub(MPI-Datatype datatype, int* MPI-Aint displacement)

MPI_TYPE_UB( DATATYPE, DISPLACEMENT, IERROR) INTEGER DATATYPE, DISPLACEMENT, IERROR

Rationale. Note that the rules given in Section 3.12.6 imply that it is er roneous to call MPI_TYPE_EXTENT, MPI-TYPE-LB, and MPl_TYPE_UB with a datatype argument that contains absolute addresses, unless all these ad dresses are within the same sequential storage. For this reason, the dis placement for the C binding in MPI-TYPE-UB is an int and not of type MPI~4int. (End of rationale.)

3.12.4 COMMIT AND FREE A datatype object has to be committed before it can be used in a communication. A committed datatype can still be used as a argument in datatype constructors.

#### There is no need to commit basic datatypes. They are &dquo;pre-committed.&dquo; MPI-TYPE-COMMIT(datatype)

INOUT datatype datatype that is committed (handle)

int MP 1 -Type -commit (MP I -Datatype *datatype)

MPI_TYPE_CO~IMIT(DATATYPE, IERRDR) INTEGER DATATYPE, IERROR

The commit operation commits the datatype, that is, the formal description of a communication buffer, not the content of that buffer. Thus, after a datatype has been committed, it can be repeatedly reused to communicate the changing content of a buffer or, indeed, the content of different buffers, with different starting addresses.

Advice to implementors. The system may &dquo;compile&dquo; at commit time an internal representation for the datatype that facilitates communication, e.g., change from a compacted representation to a flat representation of the datatype, and select the most convenient transfer mechanism. (End of advice to im~lementors.)

MPI-TYPE-FREE(datatype) INOUT datatype datatype that is freed (handle)

int MPI_Type_free(MPI~atatype *datatype)

MPI_TYPE_FREE(DATATYPE, IERROR) INTEGER DATATYPE, IERROR

Marks the datatype object associated with datatype for deallocation and sets datatype to MPp_DATATYPE_NULL. Any communication that is currently using this datatype will complete normally. Derived datatypes that were defined from the freed datatype are not affected.

Example 3.26 The following code fragment gives examples of using MPf _TYPE_ COMMIT. INTEGER typel, type2 CALL MPI-TYPE-CONTIGUOUS(5, MPI_REAL, typel, ierr) ! new type object created CALL MPI_TYPE_CDMMIT(typel, ierr) . ! now typel can be used for communication

type2 = typel 1

! type2 can be used for communication ! (it is a handle to same object as typel)

.

CALL MPI_TYPE_VECTOR(3, 5, 4, MPI_REAL, typel, ierr) ! new uncommitted type object created CALL MPI_TYPE_COMMIT(type1, ierr)

’

! now typel can be used anew for communication

Freeing a datatype does not affect any other datatype that was built from the freed datatype. The system behaves as if input datatype arguments to derived datatype constructors are passed by value.

Advice to implementors. The implementation may keep a reference count of active communications that use the datatype, in order to decide when to free it. Also, one may implement constructors of derived datatypes so that they keep pointers to their datatype arguments, rather then copying them. In this case, one needs to keep track of active datatype definition references in order to know when a datatype object can be freed. (End of advice to implementors.)

3.12.5 USE OF GENERAL DATATYPES IN COMMUNICATION

Handles to derived datatypes can be passed to a communication call wherever a datatype argument is required. A call of the form MPI_SEND(buf, count, datatype , ... ), where count > 1, is interpreted as if the call was passed a new datatype which is the concatenation of count copies of datatype. Thus, MPI_SEND(buf, count, datatype, dest, tag, comm) is equivalent to,

MPI_TYPE_CONTIGUOUS(count, datatype, newtype) MPI-TYPE-COMMIT(newtype) MPI-SEND(buf, 1, newtype, dest, tag, comm).

Similar statements apply to all other communication functions that have a count

and datatype argument. 
Suppose that a send operation MPI_SEND(buf, count, datatype, dest, tag, 
comm) is executed, where datatype has type map, 

~(~y~ea, dispo), ... , (typen-¡, disp~~-i)~, and extent extent. (Empty entries of &dquo;pseudo-type&dquo; MPI_UB and MPLLB are not listed in the type map, but they affect the value of extent.) The send operation

sends n . count entries, where entry i - n + j is at location addrij = buf + extant - .. i + disfi and has type type~, for i = 0, ... , count - 1 and j = 0, ... , n - 1. These entries need not be contiguous, nor distinct; their order can be arbitrary. The variable stored at address addrZ,~ in the calling program should be of a type that matches tyibe~, where type matching is defined as in Section 3.3.1. The

message sent contains n ~ count entries, where entry + j has type typel. Similarly, suppose that a receive operation MP1_RECV(buf, count, datatype, source, tag, comm, status) is executed, where datatype has type map, {(t~eo, dispo), ..., (tyiben_i, disp&dquo;_1)), > with extent exlent. (Again, empty entries of &dquo;pseudo-type&dquo; MPLUB and MPI_LB are not listed in the type map, but they affect the value of extent.) This receive operation receives n. count entries, where entry i. n~- j is atlocation buf +extent i + dispj and has type type~. If the incoming message consists of k elements, then we must have k < n ~ count; the ~ - ~ + j-th element of the message should have a type that matches tyf3e~. Type matching is defined according to the type signature of the correspond ing datatypes, that is, the sequence of basic type components. Type matching does not depend on some aspects of the datatype definition, such as the dis placements (layout in memory) or the intermediate types used. Example 3.27 This example shows that type matching is defined in terms of the basic types that a derived type consists of.

CALL MPI_TYPE_CONTIGUOUS( 2, MPI REAL, type2, ...) CALL MPI_TYPE_CONTIGUOUS( 4, MPI_REAL, type4, ...) CALL MPI_TYPE_CONTIGUOUS( 2, type2, type22, ...)

CALL MPI_SEND( a, 4, MPI_REAL, ...) 
CALL MPI_SEND( a, 2, type2, ...) 
CALL MPI_SEND( a, 1, type22, ...) 
CALL MPI_SEND( a, 1, type4, ...) 
CALL MPI_RECV( a, 4, MPI_REAL, ...) 
CALL MPI_RECV( a, 2, type2, ...) 
CALL MPI_RECV( a, 1, type22, ...) 
CALL MPI_RECV( a, 1, type4, ...) . 

Each of the sends matches any of the receives. A datatype may specify overlapping entries. If such a datatype is used in a receive operation, that is, if some part of the receive buffer is written more than once by the receive operation, then the call is erroneous. Suppose that MPI-RECV(buf, count, datatype, dest, tag, comm, status) is executed, where datatype has type map,

## {(~o, dislbo), ... , (typen-l, disp~_i}}.

The received message need not fill all the receive buffer, nor does it need to fill a number of locations which is a multiple of n. Any number, k, of basic elements can be received, where 0 < k ~ cunt n. The number of basic elements received can be retrieved from status using the query function MPa_GET_ELEMENTS.

MPI-GET-ELEMENTS( status, datatype, count) IN status return status of receive operation (Status) IN datatype datatype used by receive operation (handle) OUT count number of received basic elements (integer)

int MPI_Gst_elements(MPI_Status *status, MPI_Datatype datatype, int *count) MPI_GET_ELEMENTS(STATUS, DATATYPE, COUNT, IERROR) INTEGER STATUS(MPI_STATUS_SIZE), DATATYPE, COUNT, IERROR

The previously defined function, MPI_GET_COUNT (Section ~.2.5), has a different behavior. It returns the number of &dquo;top-level elements&dquo; received. In the previous example, MPI_GET_COUNT may return any integer value k, where 0 ~ k. ~ count. If MPI-GET-COUNT returns k, then the number of basic elements received (and the value returned by MPi_GET_ELEMENTS) is n ~ k. If the number of basic elements received is not a multiple of n, that is, if the receive operation has not received an integral number of datatype &dquo;copies,&dquo; then MPI_G ET_COUNT returns the value MPI_UNDEFINED.

Example 3.28 Usage of MPI_GET_COUNT and MPI-GET-ELEMENT.

CALL MPI_TYPE_CONTIGUOUS(2, MPI_REAL, Type2, ierr) CALL MPI_TYPE_COMMIT(Type2, ierr)

CALL MPI-COMM-RANK(comm, rank, ierr) IF(rank.EQ.O) THEN

CALL MPI_SEND(a, 2, MPI_REAL, 1, 0, comm, ierr) CALL MPI_SEND(a, 3, MPI_REAL, 1, 0, comm, ierr)

ELSE

CALL MPI_RECV(a, 2, Type2, 0, 0, comm, stat, ierr) CALL MPI_GET_COUNT(stat, Type2, i, ierr) ! returns i=i CALL MPI_GET_ELEMENTS(stat, Type2, i, ierr) ! returns i=2 CALL MPI_RECV(a, 2, Type2, 0, 0, comm, stat, ierr)

CALL MPI_GET_COUNT(stat, Type2, i, ierr) ! returns i=MPI tINDEFINED CALL MPI_GET_ELEMENTS(stat, Type2, i, ierr) ! returns i=3

END IF

The function MPI_GET_ELEMENTS can also be used after a probe to find the number of elements in the probed message. Note that the two functions

### MPI_GET-COUNT and MPI_GET_ELEMENTS return the same values when they are used with basic datatypes.

Rationale. The extension given to the definition of MPI_GET_COUNT seems natural: one would expect this function to return the value of the count argument, when the receive buffer is filled. Sometimes datatype represents a basic unit of data one wants to transfer, for example, a record in an array of records (stmctures) . One should be able to find out how many components were received without bothering to divide by the number of elements in each component. However, on other occasions, datatype is used to define a complex layout of data in the receiver memory, and does not represent a basic unit of data for transfers. In such cases, one needs to use the function MPLGET-ELEMENTS. (End of rationale.) Advice to implementors. The definition implies that a receive cannot change the value of storage outside the entries defined to compose the communi cation buffer. In particular, the definition implies that padding space in a structure should not be modified when such a structure is copied from one process to another. This would prevent the obvious optimization of copying the structure, together with the padding, as one contiguous block. The implementation is free to do this optimization when it does not impact the outcome of the computation. The user can &dquo;force&dquo; this optimization by explicitly including padding as part of the message. (End of advice to ixn~lemertors. )

3.12.6 CORRECT USE OF ADDRESSES

Successively declared variables in C or Fortran are not necessarily stored at con tiguous locations. Thus, care must be exercised that displacements do not cross

from one variable to another. Also, in machines with a segmented address space, 
addresses are not unique and address arithmetic has some peculiar properties. 
Thus, the use of addresses, that is, displacements relative to the start address 
MPI_BOTTOM, has to be restricted. 
Variables belong to the same sequential storage if they belong to the same 
array, to the same COMMON block in Fortran, or to the same structure in C. 
Valid addresses are defined recursively as follows: 
1. The function MPIADDRESS returns a valid address, when passed as argu 
ment a variable of the calling program. 
2. The buf argument of a communication function evaluates to a valid address, 
when passed as argument a variable of the calling program. 
3. Ifv is a valid address, and i is an integer, then v+ i is a valid address, provided 
v and v+i are in the same sequential storage. 
4. If v is a valid address then MPI_BOTTOM + v is a valid address. 
A correct program uses only valid addresses to identify the locations of entries 
in communication buffers. Furthermore, if u and v are two valid addresses, then 

the (integer) difference u - v can be computed only if both u and v are in the same sequential storage. No other arithmetic operations can be meaningfully executed on addresses. The rules above impose no constraints on the use of derived datatypes, as long as they are used to define a communication buffer that is wholly contained within the same sequential storage. However, the construction of a communica tion buffer that contains variables that are not within the same sequential storage must obey certain restrictions. Basically, a communication buffer with variables that are not within the same sequential storage can be used only by specifying in the communication call buf = MPI_BOTTOM, count = 1, and using a datatype argument where all displacements are valid (absolute) addresses.

Advice to users. It is not expected that MPI implementations will be able to detect erroneous, &dquo;out of bound&dquo; displacements-unless those overflow the user address space-since the MPI call may not know the extent of the arrays and records in the host program. (End of advice to users.)

Advice to implementors. There is no need to distinguish (absolute) addresses and (relative) displacements on a machine with contiguous address space: MPI_BOTTOM is zero, and both addresses and displacements are integers. On machines where the distinction is required, addresses are recognized as expressions that involve MPI_BOTTOM. (End of advice to ~mlble~nentors. )

3.12.7 EXAMPLES

#### The following examples illustrate the use of derived datatypes.

Example 3.29 Send and receive a section of a 3D array. REAL a(100,100,100), e(9,9,9) INTEGER oneslice, twoslice, threeslice, sizeofreal, myrank, ierr _ INTEGER status(MPI_STATUS_SIZE) 6 extract the section a(1:17:2, 3:11, 2:10) C’ and store it in e(:,:,:).

_ CALL MPI_COMM_RANK(MPI_COMM_WORLD, myrank)

CALL MPI_TYPE_EXTENT( MPI_REAL, sizeofreal, ierr)

C create datatype for a 1D section CALL MPI_TYPE_VECTOR( 9, 1, 2, MPI_REAL, oneslice, ierr)

C create datatype for a 2D section

’ CALL MPI_TYPE_HVECTDR(9, 1, 100*sizeofreal, oneslice, twoslice, ierr)

C create datatype for the entire section

CALL MPI_TYFE_HVECTOR( 9, 1, 100*100*sizeofreal, twoslice, 1, threeslice, ierr)

CALL MPI_TYPE_COMMIT( threeslice, ierr)

’

CALL MPI_SENDRECV(a(1,3,2), 1, threeslice, myrank, 0, e, 9*9*9,

MPI_REAL, myrank, 0, MPI-COMM-WORLD, status, ierr)

Example 3.30 Copy the (strictly) lower triangular part of a matrix. REAL a(100,100), b(100,100) , INTEGER disp(100), blocklen(100), ltype, myrank, ierr INTEGER status(MPI_STATUS_SIZE)

y copy lower triangular part of array a ~ onto lower triangular part of array b ~ CALL MPI_COMM_RANK(MPI_CDMM_WORLD, myrank)

,$ compute start and size of each column ,

DO i=l, 100 
disp(i) = 100*(i-1) -~ i . 
block(i) = 100-i _ 
END DO 

&dquo;

O’ create datatype for lower triangular part CALL MPI_TYPE_INDEXED( 100, block, disp, MPI_REAL, ltype, ierr)

CALL MPI_TYPE_COMMIT(Itype, ierr)

’

CALL MPI_SENDRECV( a, 1, ltype, myrank, 0, b, 1,

’

ltype, myrank, 0, MPI_COMM_WDRLD. status, ierr)

### Example 3.31 Transpose a matrix.

REAL a(100,100), b(100,100) INTEGER row, xpose, sizeofreal, myrank, ierr INTEGER status(MPI_STATUS_SIZE)

C. transpose matrix a onto b

CALL MPI_CDMM_RANK(MPI_CŒ1M_WDRLD, myrank)

CALL MPI_TYPE_EXTENT( MPI_REAL, sizeofreal, ierr)

C create datatype for one row

CALL MPI_TYPE_VECTOR( 100, 1, 100, MPI_REAL, row, ierr)

C create datatype for matrix in row-major order

CALL MPI_TYFE_HVECTOR( 100, 1, sizeofreal, row, xpose, ierr)

CALL MPI_TYPE_COMMIT( xpose, ierr)

C send matrix in row-major order and receive in column major order

CALL MPI_SENDRECV( a, 1, xpose, myrank, 0, b, 100*100,

MPI_REAL, myrank, 0, MPI-COMM-WORLD, status, ierr)

### Example 3.32 Another approach to the transpose problem:

REAL a(100,100), b(100,100) INTEGER disp(2), blocklen(2), type(2), row, rowl, sizeofreal

INTEGER myrank, ierr

INTEGER status(MPI_STATUS_SIZE)

CALL MPI-COMM-RANK(MPI-COMM-WORLD, myrank)

o transpose matrix a onto b

CALL MPI_TYPE_EXTENT( MPI_REAL, sizeofreal, ierr)

C create datatype for one row

CALL MPI_TYPE_VECTOR( 100, 1, 100, MPI_REAL, row, ierr)

C create datatype for one row, with the extent of one real number

disp(l) = 0 disp(2) = sizeofreal type(1) - row type(2) = MPI_UB blocklen(1) = 1 blocklen(2) = 1

CALL MPI_TYPE_STRUCT( 2, blocklen, disp, type, rowl, ierr)

CALL MPI_TYPE_COMMIT( rowl, ierr)

C send 100 rows and receive in column major order

CALL MPI_SENDRECV( a, 100, rowl, myrank, 0, b, 100*100,

MPI_REAL, myrank, 0, MPI-COMM-WORLD, status, ierr)

### Example 3.33 We manipulate an array of structures.

struct Partstruct {

int class; /* particle class */ double d[6]; /* particle coordinates */ char b[7]; /* some additional information */ ~~

struct Partstruct particle[1000];

int i, dest, rank; 
MPI_Comm comm; 

/* build datatype describing structure */

MPI_Datatype Particletype; 
MPI_Datatype type[3] = {MPI_INT, MPI_DOUBLE, MPI_CHAP,~ ; 
int blocklen[3] = Tl, 6, 7}; 
MPI_Aint disp [3] ; 
int base; 

. /* compute displacements of structure components */

MPI_Address( particle, disp);

’

MPI_Address( particle[0],d, disp+1); MPI_Address( partlcle[0].b, disp+2); base =

disp [0] ; for (i=0; i <3; i++) disp[i] - base;

MPI_Type_struct( 3, blocklen, disp, type, &Particletype);

/* If compiler does padding in mysterious ways, the following may be safer */

MPI_Datatype typel[4] = -{;MPI_INT, MPI_DOUBLE, MPI_CHAR, MPI_UB}; 
int blocklen1[4] = {1, 6, 7, 1}; 
MPI_Aint displ[4]; 

/* compute displacements of structure components *1

MPI_Address( particle, displ); 
MPI_Address( particle[0].d, displ+1); 
MPI_Address( particle[0].b, displ+2); 
MPI_Address( particle+1, displ+3); 
base = 

displ [0] ; for (i=0; i <4; i++) displ[i] -= base;

/* build datatype describing structure */

MPI_Type_struct( 4, blocklenl, displ, typel, &Particletype);

’

/* 4.1: send the entire array */

MPI_Type_commit( &Particletype);

’

MPI_Send( particle, 1000, Particletype, dest, tag, comm);

/* 4.2: send only the entries of class zero particles, preceded by the number of such entries */

MPI-Datatype Zparticles; /* datatype describing all particles , with class zero (needs to be recomputed . if classes change) */ MPI_Datatype Ztype;

MPI_Aint zdisp [1000] ; 
int zblock[1000], j, k; 
int zzblock[2] _ {1,1)-; 
MPI_Aint zzdisp [2] ; 

’

MPI_Datatype zztype[2];

/* compute displacements of class zero particles */ ~ 
j = 0; 
for(i=0; i < 1000; i++) 

if (particleCi].class==0) {

zdisp[j] = i; 
zblock [j = 1; 
j++; 
) 

/* create datatype for class zero particles */ MPI_Type_indexed( j, zblock, zdisp, Particletype, &Zparticles);

/* prepend particle count */ 
MPI_Address(&j, zzdisp); _ ~ 
MPI Address(particle, zzdisp+1); 
zztype[0] = MPI_INT; 

zztype[l] = Zparticles;

’

MPI_Type_struct(2, zzblock, zzdisp, zztype, &Ztype);

MPI_Type_commit( &Ztype); 
MPI_Send( MPI-BOTTOM, 1, Ztype, dest, tag, comm); 

/* A probably more efficient way of defining Zparticles */ /* consecutive particles with index zero are handled as one block */ j=0’> for (i=0; i < 1000; i++) if (particle [i] . index==0) {

for (k=i+l; (k < 1000)8c8c(particle[k] .index == 0) ; k++); 
zdisp[j] = i; 
zblock[j] = k-i; 
j++; 
i = k; 
j- 

’

MPI_Type_indexed( j, zblock, zdisp, Particletype, &Zparticles);

/* 4.3: send the first two coordinates of all entries */

MPI_Datatype Allpairs; /* datatype for all pairs of coordinates */

MPI-Aint sizeofentry;

hIPI ~’ype_extent( Particletype, &sizeofentry); , /* sizeofentry can also be computed by subtracting the address of particle [0] from the address of particle [1] */

MPI_Type_hvector( 1000, 2, sizeofentry, MPI_DOUBLE, &Allpairs); 
MPI_Type_commit( &Allpairs); 
MPI_Send( particle[0].d, 1, Allpairs, dest, tag, comm); 

~ /* an alternative solution to 4.3 */ .

MPI_Datatype Onepair; /* datatype for one pair of coordinates, with the extent of one particle entry */

MPI_Aint disp2 [3] ;

MPI_Datatype type2[3] = {MPI_LB, MPI-DOUBLE, MPI-UBI; 
int blocklen2[3] = ~{1, 2, 1}; 
MPI_Address( particle, disp2); 
MPI_Address( particle[0].d, disp2+1); 
MPI_Address( particle+1, disp2+2); 
base = 
disp2[0]; 
for (i=0; i<2; i++) disp2[i] -= base; 
MFI_Type_str~ct( 3, blocklen2, disp2, type2, &Dnepair); 
MPI_Typedcommit( &anepair); 
MPI-Send( particle[0].d, 1000, Onepair, dest, tag, comm); 

Example 3.34 The same manipulations as in the previous example, but use ab

#### solute addresses in datatypes.

struct Partstruct

-c

int class; double d [6] ; char b [7] ; h

struct Partstruct particle[1000];

/* build datatype describing first array entry */

MPI_Datatype Particletype; 
MPI-Datatype type[3] = ~N1PI_INT, MPI_DOUBLE, MPI_CHAR}; 
int block [3] = {1, 6, 7}; 
MPI_Aint disp [3] ; 
MPI_Address( particle, disp); 
MPI_Address( particT.e[0].d, disp+1); 
MPI_Address( particle[0].b, disp+2); 
MPI_Type_struct( 3, block, disp, type, &Particletype); 

/* Particletype describes first array entry -- using absolute

addresses */ /* 5.1:

send the entire array */

MPI-Type_commit( &Particletype);

MPI_Send( 1~£PI_BDTTOM, 1000, Particletype, dest, tag, comm)1

/* 5.2: send the entries of class zero, preceded by the number of such entries */

MPI_Datatype Zparticles, Ztype;

MPI-A~,nt zdisp [1000] int zblock [1000] , i, j, k; int zzblock[2] _ {1,1};

MPI_Datatype zztype[2]; 
MPI_Aint zzdrsp [2] ; 
j=0; 
for (i=O; i < 1000; i++) 
if (particle Ci] . index==0) 
{ 
for (k=i+l; (k < 1000)&&(particle[k].index = 0) ; k++); 
zdisp[j] = i; 
zblock[j] = k-i; 
j++; 
i = k; 
} 

MPI_Type~indexed( j, zblock, zdisp, Particletype, &Zparticles); /* Zparticles describe particles with class zero, using their absolute addresses*/

/* prepend particle count */

MPI_Address(&j, zzdisp); 
zzdisp[l] = MPI_BOTTOM; 
zztype [0] = MPI_INT; 

zztype [1]

=

Zparticles; MPI_Type_struct(2, zzblock, zzdisp, zztype, &Ztype);

MPI_Type_commit( &Ztype);

MPI_Send( MPI_BOTTOM, 1, Ztype, dest, tag, comm);

Example 3.35 Handling of unions. 
union { 
int ival; 
float fval; 
} u [ 1000] 

int utype;

/* All entries of u have identical type; variable utype keeps track of their current type */

| ~1PI_Datatype | type [2] ; | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| int | blocklen[2] = {1,1]-; | | |
| MPI_Aint | disp [2] ; | | |

3~I_Datatype mpa_utype [2] ;

MPI_Aint i, j ;

/* compute an MPI datatype for each possible union type; assume values are left-aligned in union storage. */

MPI_Address( u, &i);

MPI_Address( u+1, &j); disp[0] = 0; disp[1]

.

= j-i;

type[l] = MPI_UB;

type [0] = MFI_I~1T;

MPI_Type_struct(2, blocklen, disp, type, &mpi_utype[0]);

type [0] = MPI_FLDAT; MPI_Type_struct(2, blocklen, disp, type, 8cmpi_utype[1]); i for(i=O; i<2; i++) MPI_Type~commit(&mpi_utypeEi]); i /* actual communication */

MPI_Send(u. 1000, mpi_utype[utype], dest, tag, comm)) ;

3.13 Pack and Unpack

Some existing communication libraries provide pack/unpack functions for send ing noncontiguous data. In these, the user explicitly packs data into a contiguous buffer before sending it, and unpacks it from a contiguous buffer after receiving it. Derived datatypes, which are described in Section 3.12, allow one, in most cases, to avoid explicit packing and unpacking. The user specifies the layout of the data to be sent or received, and the communication library directly accesses a noncontiguous buffer. The pack/unpack routines are provided for compat ibility with previous libraries. Also, they provide some functionality that is not otherwise available in MPI. For instance, a message can be received in several parts, where the receive operation done on a later part may depend on the con-

tent of a former part. Another use is that outgoing messages may be explicitly buffered in user supplied space, thus overriding the system buffering policy. Fi nally, the availability of pack and unpack operations facilitates the development of additional communication libraries layered on top of MPI. MPI_PACK(inbuf, incount, datatype, outbuf, outsize, position, comm)

IN inbuf input buffer start (choice) IN incount number of input data items (integer) IN datatype datatype of each input data item (handle) OUT Outbuf output buffer start (choice) IN outsize output buffer size, in bytes (integer) INOUT position current position in buffer, in bytes (integer) IN cOITIm communicator for packed message (handle)

int MPI-Pack(void* inbuf, int incount, MPI-Datatype datatype, void *outbuf, 
int outsize, int *position, MPI-Comm comm) 
MPI~ACK(INBUF, INCOUNT, DATATYPE, OUTBUF, OUTSIZE, POSITION, COMM, IERROR) 
 INBUF(*), OUTBUF(*) 
INTEGER INCOUNT, DATATYPE, OUTSIZE, POSITION, COMM, IERROR 

Packs the message in the send buffer specified by inbuf, incount, datatype into the buffer space specified by outbuf and outsize. The input buffer can be any communication buffer allowed in MPI_SEND. The output buffer is a contiguous storage area containing outsize bytes, starting at the address outbuf (length is counted in bytes, not elements, as if it were a communication buffer for a message of type MPI_PACKED). The input value of position is the first location in the output buffer to be used for packing. position is incremented by the size of the packed message, and the output value of position is the first location in the output buffer following the locations occupied by the packed message. The comm argument is the communicator that will be subsequently used for sending the packed message. MPI_UNPACK(inbuf, insize, position, outbuf, outcount, datatype, comm)

IN inbuf input buffer start (choice)

IN insize size of input buffer, in bytes (integer) INOUT position current position in bytes (integer) OUT OUtbuf output buffer start (choice) IN outcount number of items to be unpacked (integer) iJ1N datatype datatype of each output data item (handle) IN COmm communicator for packed message (handle)

int MPI_Unpack(void* inbuf, int insize, int *position, void *outbuf, int outcount, MPI-Datatype datatype, MPI-Comm comm)

MPI-UNPACK(INBUF, INSIZE, POSITION, OU~TBUF, OUTCOUNT, DATATYPE, COMM, IERROR) INBUF(*), OUTBUFC*) INTEGER INSIZE, POSITION, OUTCOUNT, DATATYPE, COMM, IERROR Unpacks a message into the receive buffer specified by outbuf, outcount, datatype from the buffer space specified by inbuf and insize. The output buffer can be any communication buffer allowed in MPI_RECV. The input buffer is a contiguous storage area containing insize bytes, starting at address inbuf. The input value of position is the first location in the output buffer occupied by the packed message. position is incremented by the size of the packed message, so that the output value of position is the first location in the output buffer after the locations occupied by the message that was unpacked. comm is the communicator used to receive the packed message. Advice to users. Note the difference between MPLRECV and MPI-UNPACK: in MPI_RECV, the count argument specifies the maximum number of items that can be received. The actual number of items received is determined by the length of the incoming message. In MPI_UNPACK, the count argument specifies the actual number of items that are unpacked; the &dquo;size&dquo; of the corresponding message is the increment in position. The reason for this change is that the &dquo;incoming message size&dquo; is not predetermined since the user decides how much to unpack; nor is it easy to determine the &dquo;message size&dquo; from the number of items to be unpacked. In fact, in a heterogeneous system, this number may not be determined a priori. (End of advice to users.)

To understand the behavior of pack and unpack, it is convenient to think of the data part of a message as being the sequence obtained by concatenating the successive values sent in that message. The pack operation stores this sequence in the buffer space, as if sending the message to that buffer. The unpack operation retrieves this sequence from buffer space, as if receiving a message from that buffer. (It is helpful to think of internal Fortran files or ss~canf in C, for a similar function.) Several messages can be successively packed into one packing unit. This is effected by several successive related calls to MPi_PACK, where the first call provides position = 0, and each successive call inputs the value of position that was output by the previous call, and the same values for outbuf, outcount and comm. This packing unit now contains the equivalent information that would have been stored in a message by one send call with a send buffer that is the &dquo;concatenation&dquo; of the individual send buffers. A packing unit can be sent using type MPI_PACKED. Any point-to-point or collective communication function can be used to move the sequence of bytes that forms the packing unit from one process to another. This packing unit can now be received using any receive operation, with any datatype: the type matching rules are relaxed for messages sent with type MPl_PACKED.

A message sent with any type (including MPI_PACKED) can be received us ing the type MPI_PACKED. Such a message can then be unpacked by calls to MPI_U~1PACK. A packing unit (or a message created by a regular, &dquo;typed&dquo; send) can be unpacked into several successive messages. This is effected by several successive related calls to MPI_U~1PACK, where the first call provides position = 0, and each successive call inputs the value of position that was output by the previous call, and the same values for inbuf, insize, and comm.

The concatenation of two packing units is not necessarily a packing unit; 
nor is a substring of a packing unit necessarily a packing unit. Thus, one cannot 
concatenate two packing units and then unpack the result as one packing unit; 
nor can one unpack a substring of a packing unit as a separate packing unit. 
Each packing unit, that was created by a related sequence of pack calls, or by a 
regular send, must be unpacked as a unit, by a sequence of related unpack calls. 
Rationale. The restriction on &dquo;atomic&dquo; packing and unpacking of packing 
units allows the implementation to add at the head of packing units ad 

ditional information, such as a description of the sender architecture (to be used for type conversion, in a heterogeneous environment). (End of rationale.)

The following call allows the user to find out how much space is needed to 
pack a message and, thus, manage space allocation for buffers. 
MPI-PACK-SIZE(incount, datatype, comm, size) 
IN incount count argument to packing call (integer) 
lli datatype datatype argument to packing call (handle) 
IS Comm communicator argument to packing call 
(handle) 
OUT size upper bound on size of packed message, in bytes 
(integer) 
int MPI-Pack-size(int incount, MPI~atatype datatype, MPI-Comm comm, 
int *size) 
MPI-PACK-SIZE(INCOUNT, DATATYPE, COMM, SIZE, IERROR) 
INTEGER INCOUNT, DATATYPE, COMM, SIZE, IERROR 

### A call to MPI_PACK_SIZE(incount, datatype, comm, size) returns in size an upper bound on the increment in position that is effected by a call to

MPI_PACK(inbuf, incount, datatype, outbuf, outcount, position, comm). Rationale. The call returns an upper bound, rather than an exact bound, since the exact amount of space needed to pack the message may depend on the context (e.g., first message packed in a packing unit may take more

space). (End of rationale.)

| Example 3.36 An example using MPI_PACK. | | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| int position, i, j, | | | | a[2]; |
| char buff[1000]; | | | | |
| MPI_Comm_rank(MPI_COMM_WORLD, ~myrank); | | | | |
| if (myrank == 0) | | | | |
| 1 | | | | |

’

/ * SENDER CODE */

position = 0; MPI_Pack(8ci, 1, MPI_INT, buff, 1000, &position, MPI_CDMM_WORLD); MPI_Pack(&j, 1, MPI_INT, buff, 1000, &position, MPI_COMM_WORLD)¡ MPI_Send( buff, position, MPI_PACKED, 1, 0, MPI_CDMM_WDRLD);

}

else /* RECEIVER CODE */ MPI_Recv( a, 2, MPI_INT, 0, 0, MPI_COMM_WDRLD)

’

~

### Example 3.37 A elaborate example.

int position, i; float a[1000] ; char buff[1000]

MPI_Comm_rank(MPI_Comm_tforld, &myrank); 
if (myrank == 0) 
1 

/ * SENDER CODE */

int len [2] ; 
MPI_Aint disp[2]; 

MPI Datatype type[2], newtype;

/* build datatype for i followed by a[OJ...a[i-l] */

len [0] = 1; 
len[l] = i; 
MPI_Addzess( &i, disp); 

MPI_Address( a, disp+1);

type[0] = MPI_iNT; 
type[l] = MPI_FLDAT; 

MPI_Type_struct( 2, len, disp, type, 8anewtype);

-

MPI_Type_commit ( 8t~aewtype) ;

/* Pack i followed by a[0]...a[i-l]*/

position = 0; 
MPI_Pack( MPI_BOTTOM, 1, newtype, buff, 1000, &position, MPI_CDMM_WDRLD); 

/* Send */

MPI_Send( buff, position, MPI_PACKED, 1, 0, MPI-COMM-WORLD)

/* *****

One can replace the last three lines with

MPI_Send( MPI_BOTTOM, 1, newtype, 1, 0, MPI_CDMM_WORLD);

’

***** */

}

else /* myrank == 1 */ { .

/* RECEIVER CODE */

MPI_Status status;

/* Receive */

.

MPI_Recv( buff, 1000, MPI_PACKED, 0, 0, &status); j ’

/* Unpack i */

&dquo;

position = 0; 
MPI_Unpack(buff, 1000, &position, &i, 1, MPI-INT, MPI_COMM_WORLD); 

. /* Unpack a[0]...a[i-l] */ MPI lJnpack(buff, 1000, &position, a, i, MPI_FLDAT, MPI_COMM_WDRLD);

’

)

&dquo;

Example 3.38 Each process sends a count, followed by count characters to the root; the root concatenates all characters into one string.

int count, gsize, counts[64), totalcount, kl, k2, k, displs[64], position, concat_pos; _ char ehr [100) , *lbuf, *rbuf , *cbuf;

. J .

MPI_Comm_size(comm, &gsize); MPI_Comm_rank(comm, &myrank);

/* allocate local pack buffer */ MPI_Pack_size(1, MPI_INT, comm, &kl); MPI_Pack_size(count, MPI_CHAR, &k2); k = kl+k2; lbuf = (char *)malloc(k);

/* pack count, followed by count characters */ position = 0; MPI_Pack(&count, 1, MPI_INT, &lbuf, k, &position, comm); MPI_Pack(chr, count, MPI_CHAR, &lbuf, k, &position, comm);

if (myrank != root)

/* gather at root sizes of all packed messages */

MPI_Gather( &position, 1, MPI_INT, NULL, NULL, NULL, root, comm);

/* gather at root packed messages */ MPI_Gatherv( &buf, position, MPI_PACKED, NULL, NULL, NULL, NULL, root, comm);

else ~ /* root code */ /* gather sizes of all packed messages */ MPI_Gather( &position, 1, MPI_INT, counts, 1, MPI_INT, root, comm);

/* gather all packed messages */ displs [0] = 0; for ( i=1; i < gsize; i++)

displs [i] = displs [i-1] + counts [i-1] ; totalcount =

dipls [gsize-1] + counts Cgsize-1] ; rbuf = (char *)malloc(totalcount); cbuf = (char *)malloc(totalcount); MPI_Gatherv( lbuf, position, MPI_PACKED, rbuf, counts, displs, MPI_PACKED, root, comm);

/* unpack all messages and concatenate strings */ 
concat_pos = 0; 
for (i=0; i < gsize; i++) { 
position = 0; 
MPI_Unpack( rbuf+displs [i] , totalcount-displs[i], 

&position, &count, 1, MPI_INT, comm);

MPI_Unpack( rbuf+displs[i], totalcount-displs[i], 
&position, cbuf+concat_pos, count, MPI_CHAR, comm); 
concat_pos += count; 
3’ 

cbuf[concat-pos] = (BO) ;

1

CHAPTER 4

COLLECTIVE COMMUNICATION

4.1 Introduction and Overview Collective communication is defined as communication that involves a group of processes. The functions of this type provided by MPI are the following: ~ Barrier synchronization across all group members (Section 4.3). ~ Broadcast from one member to all members of a group (Section 4.4). This is shown in figure 4.1. . Gather data from all group members to one member (Section 4.5). This is shown in figure 4.1.

. Scatter data from one member to all members of a group (Section 4.6). This is shown in figure 4.1. ~ A variation on Gather where all members of the group receive the result (Section 4.7). This is shown as &dquo;allgather&dquo; in figure 4.1.

. Scatter/Gather data from all members to all members of a group (also . called complete exchange or all-to-all) (Section 4.8). This is shown as &dquo;alltoall&dquo; in figure 4.1. . Global reduction operations such as sum, max, min, or user-defined func tions, where the result is returned to all group members and a variation

where the result is returned to only one member (Section 4.9). 
. A combined reduction and scatter operation (Section 4.10) . 
. Scan across all members of a group (also called prefix) (Section 4.11). 

A collective operation is executed by having all processes in the group call the communication routine, with matching arguments. The syntax and seman tics of the collective operations are defined to be consistent with the syntax and semantics of the point-to-point operations. Thus, general datatypes are allowed and must match between sending and receiving processes as specified in Chapter 3. One of the key arguments is a communicator that defines the group of participating processes and provides a context for the operation. Several collec tive routines such as broadcast and gather have a single originating or receiving process. Such processes are called the root. Some arguments in the collective functions are specified as &dquo;significant only at root,&dquo; and are ignored for all par-

Fig. 4.1 Collective move functions illustrated for a group of six processes. In each case, each row of boxes represents data locations in one process. Thus, in the broadcast, initially just the first process contains the data but after the broadcast all processes contain it.

ticipants except the root. The reader is referred to Chapter 3 for information concerning communication buffers, general datatypes and type matching rules, and to Chapter 5 for information on how to define groups and create commu nicators.

The type-matching conditions for the collective operations are more strict than the corresponding conditions between sender and receiver in point-to point. Namely, for collective operations, the amount of data sent must exactly match the amount of data specified by the receiver. Distinct type maps (the layout in memory, see Section 3.12) between sender and receiver are still allowed. Collective routine calls can (but are not required to) return as soon as their participation in the collective communication is complete. The completion of a call indicates that the caller is now free to access locations in the communication buffer. It does not indicate that other processes in the group have completed or even started the operation (unless otherwise indicated in the description of the operation). Thus, a collective communication call may, or may not, have the effect of synchronizing all calling processes. This statement excludes, of course, the barrier function.

Collective communication calls may use the same communicators as point to-point communication; MPI guarantees that messages generated on behalf of collective communication calls will not be confused with messages generated by point-to-point communication. A more detailed discussion of correct use of collective routines is found in Section 4.12.

Rationcale. The equal-data restriction (on type matching) was made so as to avoid the complexity of providing a facility analogous to the status argument of MP1_RECV for discovering the amount of data sent. Some of the collective routines would require an array of status values. The statements about synchronization are made so as to allow a variety of implementations of the collective functions. The collective operations do not accept a message tag argument. If future revisions of MPI define non-blocking collective functions, then tags (or a similar mechanism) will need to be added so as to allow the dis ambiguation of multiple, pending, collective operations. (End ofrationale.)

Advice to users. It is dangerous to rely on synchronization side-effects of the collective operations for program correctness. For example, even though a particular implementation may provide a broadcast routine with a side-effect of synchronization, the standard does not require this, and a program that relies on this will not be portable. On the other hand, a correct, portable program must allow for the fact that a collective call may be synchronizing. Though one cannot rely on any synchronization side-effect, one must program so as to allow it. These issues are discussed further in Section 4.12. (End of advice to users.)

Advice to implementors. ’While vendors may write optimized collective rou tines matched to their architectures, a complete library of the collective communication routines can be written entirely using the MPI point-to point communication functions and a few auxiliary functions. If imple menting on top of point-to-point, a hidden, special communicator must be created for the collective operation so as to avoid interference with any

on-going point-to-point communication at the time of the collective call.

### This is discussed further in Section 4.12. (End of advice to irrc~blemenGors.)

4.2 Communicator Argument 
The key concept of the collective functions is to have a &dquo;group&dquo; of participating 
processes. The routines do not have a group identifier as an explicit argument. 
Instead, there is a communicator argument. For the purposes of this chapter, 
a communicator can be thought of as a group identifier linked with a context. 
An inter-communicator, that is, a communicator that spans two groups, is not 
allowed as an argument to a collective function. 

#### 4.3 Barrier Synchronization

MPI_BARRIER( comm ) IN comm communicator (handle)

int MPI-Barrier(MPI-Comm comm )

MPI_BARRIER(COMM, IERROR) 
INTEGER CDMM, IERROR 
MPI_BARRIER blocks the caller until all group members have called it. The 
call returns at any process only after all group members have entered the call. 

4.4 Broadcast

MPI_BCAST( buffer, count, datatype, root, comm )

INOUT buffer starting address of buffer (choice)

IN count number of entries in buffer (integer) IN datatype data type of’buffer (handle) IN root rank of broadcast root (integer) IN Comm communicator (handle)

int MPI-Bcast(void* buffer, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int root, 
MPI_Comm comm ) > 
MPI~CAST(BUFFER, COUNT, DATATYPE, ROOT, COMM, IERRDR) - 
 BUFFER(*) 
INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, ROOT, COMM, IERROR . 
MPI_BCAST broadcasts a message from the process with rank root to all 
processes of the group, itself included. It is called by all members of group 

using the same arguments for comm, root. On return, the contents of root’s communication buffer has been copied to all processes. General, derived datatypes are allowed for datatype. The type signature of count, datatype on any process must be equal to the type signature of count, datatype at the root. This implies that the amount of data sent must be equal to the amount received, pairwise between each process and the root. MPI_BCAST and all other data-movement collective routines make this restriction. Distinct type maps between sender and receiver are still allowed.

4.4.1 EXAMPLE USING MPI_BCAST Example 4.1 Broadcast 100 ints from process 0 to every process in the group.

MPI_Comm comm;

int array[100];

’

int root=0 ; I tL,

MPI-Bcast( array, 100, MPI_INT, root, comm);

As in many of our example code fragments, we assume that some of the variables (such as comm in the above) have been assigned appropriate values.

4.5 Gather 
MPI_GATHER~ sendbuf, sendcount, sendtype, recvbuf, recvcount, recvtype, 
root, comm) 
114 sendbuf starting address of send buffer (choice) 
IN . sendCOUnt number of elements in send buffer (integer) 
IN sendtype data type of send buffer elements (handle) 
OUT recvbuf address of receive buffer (choice, significant only 
at root) 
~)~ recvcount number of elements for any single receive (inte 
ger, significant only at root) 
IN recvtype data type of recv buffer elements (significant only 
at root) (handle) 
IN root rank of receiving process (integer) 
lll comm communicator (handle) 
int MPI_GatherCvoid* sendbuf, iht sendcount, MPI~atatype sendtype, 
void* recvbuf, int recvcount, MPI-Datatype recvtype, 
int root, MPI-Comm comm) _ 
MPI-GATHER(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, ROOT, 
COMM, IERROR) 
 SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) 
INTEGER SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, ROOT, COMM, IERROR _ 

Each process (root process included) sends the contents of its send buffer to the root process. The root process receives the messages and stores them in rank order. The outcome is as if each of the n processes in the group (including the root process) had executed a call to

MPI-Send(sendbuf, sendcount, sendtype, root, ...), and the root had executed n calls to MPI-Recv(recvbuf + i - recvcount - extent(recvtype), recvcount,

recvtype, i, ...), where extent(recvtype) is the type extent obtained from a call to MPI_Type_ extent. An alternative description is that the n messages sent by the processes in the

group are concatenated in rank order, and the resulting message is received by 
the root as if by a call to MPI_RECV(recvbuf, recvcount.n, recvtype, ... ). 
The receive buffer is ignored for all non-root processes. 
General, derived datatypes are allowed for both sendtype and recvtype. The 

type signature of sendcount, sendtype on process i must be equal to the type signature of recvcou nt, recvtype at the root. This implies that the amount of data sent must be equal to the amount of data received, pairwise between each process and the root. Distinct type maps between sender and receiver are still allowed. All arguments to the function are significant on process root, while on other processes, only arguments sendbuf, sendcount, sendtype, root, comm are signif icant. The arguments root and comm must have identical values on all processes. The specification of counts and types should not cause any location on the root to be written more than once. Such a call is erroneous. Note that the recvcount argument at. the root indicates the number of items it receives from each process, not the total number of items it receives.

#### MPi_GATHERV( sendbuf, sendcount, sendtype, recvbuf, recvcounts, displs, recvtype, root, comm) IN sendbuf starting address of’send buffer (choice)

| | IN | | sendbuf | starting address of’send buffer (choice) | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | IN | | sendcounts | number of elements in send buffer (integer) | |
| | IN | | sendtype | data type of send buffer elements (handle) | |
| | OUT | | recvbuf | address of receive buffer (choice, significant only | |

IN sendcounts number of elements in send buffer (integer) 
IN sendtype data type of send buffer elements (handle) 
OUT recvbuf address of receive buffer (choice, significant only 
at root) 
IN recvcounts integer array (of length group size) containing 
the number of elements that are received from 

each process (significant only at root) IN dlSpIS integer array (oflength group size). Entry i spec ifies the displacement relative to recvbuf at which to place the incoming data from process i (signif icant only at root)

~ recvtype data type of recv buffer elements (significant only 
at root) (handle) 
M root rank of receiving process (integer) 
IN Comm communicator (handle) 
int MPI_Gatherv(void* sendbuf, int sendcount, MPI-Datatype sendtype, 
void* recvbuf, int *recvcounts, int *displs, 
MPI-Datatype recvtype, int root, MPI_Comm comm) 
I~PI_GATHERV(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNTS, DISPLS, 
RECVTYPE, ROOT, COMM, IERROR) 
 SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) 
INTEGER SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVCOUNTS(*), DISPLS(*), RECVTYPE, ROOT, 
COMM, IERROR 

MPI_GATHERV extends the functionality of MPI_GATHER by allowing a vary ing count of data from each process, since recvcounts is now an array. It also allows more flexibility as to where the data is placed on the root, by providing the new argument, displs. The outcome is as if each process, including the root process, sends a mes

sage to the root,

MPI-Send(sendbuf, sendcount, sendtype, root, ...), and the root executes n receives,

MPI-Recv(recvbuf + disp~i] ~ extent(recvtype), recvcounts~i~. 
recvtype, i, ...). 

Messages are placed in the receive buffer of the root process in rank order, that is, the data sent from process j is placed in the j th portion of the receive buffer recvbuf on process root. The jth portion of recvbuf begins at offset displsoj elements (in terms of recvtype) into recvbuf. The receive buffer is ignored for all non-root processes. The type signature implied by sendcount, sendtype on process i must be equal to the type signature implied by recvcounts[i], recvtype at the root. This implies that the amount of data sent must be equal to the amount of data re ceived, pairwise between each process and the root. Distinct type maps between sender and receiver are still allowed, as illustrated in Example 4.6. All arguments to the function are significant on process root, while on other processes, only arguments sendbuf, sendcount, sendtype, root, comm are signif icant. The arguments root and comm must have identical values on all processes. The specification of counts, types, and displacements should not cause any location on the root to be written more than once. Such a call is erroneous.

Fig. 4.2 The root process gathers 100 ints from each process in the group.

4.5.1 EXAMPLES USING MPI_GATHER, MP1_GATHERV

Example 4.2 Gather 100 ints from every process in group to root. See figure 4.2.

MPI_Comm comm;

int gsize,sendarray[100]; 
int root, *rbuf; 
MPI_Comm_size( comm, &gsize); 
rbuf = (int *)malloc(gsize*100*sizeof(int)); 
MPI_Gather( sendarray, 100, MPI_INT, rbuf, 100, MPI_INT, root, comm); 

Example 4.3 Previous example modified-only the root allocates memory for the receive buffer.

MPI_Comm Comm;

int gsize,sendarray[100]; 
int root, myrank, *rbuf; &dquo; 

MPI-Co=-rank( comm, myrank); if ( myrank == root) {

MPI_Comm_size( comm, &gsize); 
rbuf = (int *)malloc(gsize*100*sizeof(int)); 
} 

MPI_Gather( sendarray, 100, MPI_INT, rbuf, 100, MPI_INT, root, eomm);

Example 4.4 Do the same as the previous example, but use a derived datatype. Note that the type cannot be the entire set ofgsize*100 ints since type matching is defined pairwise between the root and each process in the gather.

MPI_Comm comm;

int gsize,sendarray[100]; 
int root , *rbuf; 

’

Fig. 4.3 The root process gathers 100 ints from each process in the group, and each set is placed stride ints apart.

MPI_Datatype rtype;

MPI_Comm_size( comm, Bcgsize); 
MPI_Type_contiguous( 100, MPI_INT, &rtype ); 
MPI_Type_commit( ( 8crtype ) ; 
rbuf = (int *)malloc(gsize*100*sizeof(int)); 
MPI_Gather( sendarray, 100, MPI_INT, rbuf, 1, rtype, root, comm); 

Example 4.5 Now have each process send 100 ints to root, but place each set (of 100) stride ints apart at receiving end. Use MPLGATHERV and the displs argument to achieve this effect. Assume stride ? 100. See figure 4.3.

MFT_Coznm comm;

int gsize,sendarray[100]j int root, *rbuf, stride; int *displs,i,*rcounts;

MPI_Comm_size( comm, &gsize); 
rbuf = (int *)malloc(gsize*stride*sizeof(int)); 
displs = (int *)malloc(gsize*sizeof(int)); 
rcounts = (int *)malloc(gsize*sizeof(int)); 
for (i=0; i<gsize; ++i) { 
displs[i] = i*stride; 
rcounts[i] = 100; 

}

MPI_Gatherv( sendarray, 100, MPI_INT, rbuf, rcounts, displs, MPI-INT, root, comm);

Note that the program is erroneous if stride < 100. Example 4.6 Same as Example 4.5 on the receiving side, but send the 100 ints from the Oth column of a 100x 150 int array, in C. See figure 4.4.

Fig. 4.4 The root process gathers column 0 of a 100x150 C array, and each set is placed stride ints apart.

MPI_Comm comm;

int gsi.ze, sendarzay [~.00] [150] ;

int root, *rbuf, stride; 
MPI_Datatype stype; 

int *displs,i,*rcounts;

v r ·

MPI_Comm_size( comm, &gsize); rbuf =

(int *)malloc(gsize*stride*sizeof(int)); displs = (int *)ma~.~.oc (gsize*sizeof (int) ) ; rcounts = (int *)malloc(gsize*sizeof(int)); for (i=O; i<gsize; ++i)

displs [i] = i*stride; 
rcounts [i] = 100; 

1

/* Create datatype for 1 column of array */ MPI_Type_vector( 100, 1, 150, MPI_INT, &stype); MPI_Type_commit( &stype ); MPI_Gatherv( sendarray, 1, stype, rbuf, rcounts, displs, MPI_INT, root, comm); Example 4.7 Process i sends (100 - i) ints from the ith column of a 100 x 150 int array, in C. It is received into a buffer with stride, as in the previous two examples. See figure 4.5.

MPI_Comm comm;

int gsize,sendarray[100][150],*sptr;

int root, *rbuf, stride, myrank; 
MPI_Datatype stype; 
int *displs,i,*rcounts; 

Fig. 4.5 The root process gathers 100-i ints from column i of a 100x150 C array, and each set is placed stride ints apart.

 ... 

MPI_Comm_size( comm, &gsize); MPI_Comm_rank( comm, &myrank ); rbuf =

(int *)malloc(gsize*stride*sizeof(int)); 
displs = (int *)malloc(gsize*sizeof(int)); 
rcounts = (int *)malloc(gsize*sizeof(int)); 
for (i=0; i<gsize; ++i) { 
displs [i] = i*stride; 
rcounts[i] = i00-i; /* note change from previous example */ 

I

/* Create datatype for the column we are sending */

MPI_Type_vector( 100-myrank, 1, 150, MPI_INT, &stype); 
MPI_Type_commit( &stype ); 
/* sptr is the address of start of &dquo;myrank&dquo; column 
.*/ 

sptr = &sendarray[0][myrank]; MPI_Gatherv( sptr, 1, stype, rbuf, rcounts, displs, MPI_INT, root, comm); Note that a different amount of data is received from each process.

Example 4.8 Same as Example 4.7, but done in a different way at the sending end. We create a datatype that causes the correct striding at the sending end so that that we read a column of a C array. A similar thing was done in Example 3.32, Section 3.12.7.

’

MPI_Comm comm;

int gsize,sendarray[100][150],*sptr; 
int root, *rbuf, stride, myrank, disp[2], blocklen[2]; 
MPI_Datatype stype,type[2]; 
int *displs,i,*rcounts; 

Pig. 4.6 The root process gathers 100--i ints from column i of a 100x150 C array, and each set is placed stride [il ints apart (a varying stride).

...

MPI_Comm_size( comm, &gsize); 
MPI_Comm_rank( comm, &myrank ); 
rbuf = (int *)malloc(gsize*stride*sizeof(int»; 
displs = (int *)malloc(gsize*sizeof(int)); 
rcounts = (int *)malloc(gsize*sizeof(int)); 
for (i=0; i<gsize; ++i) { 
displs[il = i*stride; 
rcounts[i] = 10o-i; 

}

/* Create datatype for one int, with extent of entire row */

disp[0] = 0; disprii = 1.50*sizeof (int) ; 
type [0] = MPI_INT; type [1] = MPI_UB; 

blocklen[0] = 1; blocklen[1] = 1; MPI_Type_struct( 2, blocklen, disp, type, &stype ); MPI_Type_commit( &stype ); sptr = &sendarray [0] [myrank] ; MPI_Gatherv( sptr, 100-myrank, stype, rbuf, rcounts, displs, MPI_INT, _ root, comm); Example 4.9 Same as Example 4.7 at sending side, but at receiving side we make the stride between received blocks vary from block to block. See figure 4.6.

MPI_Comm comm;

int gsize, sendarray [100] [150] , &dquo;’sptr; 
int root, *rbuf, *stride, myrank, bufsize; 
MPLDatatype stype; 

int *dlsplS,l,*rCOLlntS,Offset;

MPI_Comm_size( comm, &gsize); 
MPI_Comm_rank( comm, &myrank ); 

stride = (int *)malloc(gsize*sizeof(int));

/* stride[i] for i = 0 to gsize-1 is set somehow */

/* set up displs and rcounts vectors first */

displs = (int *)malloc(gsize*sizeof(int));

&dquo;

rcounts = (int *)malloc(gsize*sizeof(int)); 
offset = 0; 

for (i=0; i<gsize; ++i) {

displs [i] = offset; 
offset += stride[i]; 
rcounts[i] = 100-i; 

}

/* the required buffer size for rbuf is now easily obtained 
*/ 
bufsize = 
displs[gsize-ll+rcounts[gsize-13; 
rbuf = (int *)malloc(bufsize*sizeof(int)); 
/* Create datatype for the column we are sending 
*/ 
MPI_Type_vector( 100-myrank, 1, 150, MPI_INT, &stype); 
MPI_Type_commit( &stype ); 
sptr 
= 

&sendarray [0] [myrank] ; MPI_Gatherv( sptr, 1, stype, rbuf, rcounts, displs, MPI_INT, root, comm); Example 4.10 Process i sends num ints from the ith column of a 100 x 150 int array, in C. The complicating factor is that the various values of num are not known to root, so a separate gather must first be run to find these out. The data is placed contiguously at the receiving end.

MPI_Comm comm; . int gsize,sendarray[100][150],*sptr; . int root, *rbuf, stride, myrank, disp[2], blocklen[2]; MPI_Datatype stype,types[2]; int *displs,i,*rcounts,num;

MPI_Comm_si2eC comm, &gsize);

MPI_Comm-rank( comm, &myrank );

/* First, gather nums to root 
*/ 
rcaunts = 

(int *)malloc(gsize*sizeof(int)); MPI-Gather( &num, 1, MPI_INT, rcounts, 1, MPI_INT, root, comm); /* root now has correct rcounts, using these we set displs[] so * that data is placed contiguously (or concatenated) at receive end * /’

displs = (int *)malloc(gsize*sizeof(int)); 
displs [0] = 0; 
for (i=l; i<gsize; ++i) ~{ 

displs [i] = displs [i-1]+rcounts [i-1] ;

}

/* And, create receive buffer *1

rbuf = (int *)malloc(gsize*(displs[gsize-1]+rcounts[gsize-1]) 
*sizeof(int)); 
/* Create datatype for one int, with extent of entire row 
*1 
disp [0] = 0; disp [1] = 150*sizeof(int); 

type [0] = MPI_INT; type [1] = MPI-LTB;

blocklen [0] = 1; blocklen[l] = 1; 
MPI_Type_struct( 2, blocklen, disp, type, ~stype 7; 
MFI_Type_commit( &stype ); 
sptr = &sendarray[0][myrank]; 
MPI_Gatherv( sptr, num, stype, rbuf, rcounts, displs, MPI_INT, 
root, comm); 

4.6 Scatter

)VtPLSCATTER( sendbuf, sendcount, sendtype, recvbuf, recvcount, recvtype, root, comm)

IN sendbuf address of send buffer (choice, significant only at

root)

IN sendcount nurnberofelementssenttoeachprocess (integer, significant only at root)

IN sendtype data type of send buffer elements (significant only at root) (handle) OUT recvbuf address of receive buffer (choice)

IN reCVCOUnt number of elements in receive buffer (integer)

IN recvtype data type of receive buffer elements (handle) IN root rank of sending process (integer) M 4 Comm communicator (handle)

int i~fT_Scatter (void* sendbuf, int sendcount, MPI-Datatype sendtype, 
void* recvbuf, int recvcount, MPI-Datatype recvtype, 
int root, MPI-Comm comm) 
MPI-SCATTER(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, 
ROOT, COMM, IERROR) 
 SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) 
INTEGER SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, ROOT, COMM, IERROR 
MP1_SCATTER is the inverse operation to MPI_GATHER. 

### The outcome is as if the root executed n send operations,

MPI-Send(sendbuf + i - sendcount - extent(sendtype), sendcount,

sendtype, i, ...),

and each process executed a receive,

MPI-Recv(recvbuf, recvcount, recvtype, i, ...).

An alternative description is that the root sends a message with MPLSend (sendbuf, sendcount.n, sendtype, ...). This message is split into n equal seg ments, the ith segment is sent to the ith process in the group, and each process receives this message as above. The send buffer is ignored for all non-root processes. The type signature associated with sendcount, sendtype at the root must be equal to the type signature associated with recvcount, recvtype at all processes (however, the type maps may be different). This implies that the amount of data sent must be equal to the amount of data received, pairwise between each process and the root. Distinct type maps between sender and receiver are still allowed. All arguments to the function are significant on process root, while on other processes, only arguments recvbuf, recvcount, recvtype, root, comm are significant. The arguments root and comm must have identical values on all processes. The specification of counts and types should not cause any location on the root to be read more than once.

Rational. Though not needed, the last restriction is imposed so as to achieve symmetry with MPI_GATHER, where the corresponding restriction (a multiple-write restriction) is necessary. (End of rationale.)

MPI_SCATTERV( sendbuf, sendcounts, displs, sendtype, recvbuf, recvcount, recvtype, root, comm) IN sendbuf address of send buffer (choice, significant only at

root) IN sendcounts integer array (of length group size) specifying the number of elements to send to each processor IN displs integer array (oflength group size). Entry i spec ifies the displacement (relative to sendbuf from which to take the outgoing data to process i

IN sendtype data type of send buffer elements (handle) OUT recvbuf address of receive buffer (choice) IN recvcount number of elements in receive buffer (integer) IN recvtype data type of receive buffer elements (handle)

IN root rank of sending process (integer) IN Comm communicator (handle)

int MPI_Scatterv(void* sendbuf, int *sendcounts, int *displs, 
MPI~atatype sendtype, void* recvbuf, int recvcount, 
MPI-Datatype recvtype, int root, MPI-Comm comm) 
MPI-SCATTERV(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNTS, DISPLS, SENDTYPE, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNT, 
RECVTYPE, ROOT, COMM, IERROR) 
 SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) 
INTEGER SENDCOUNTS(*), DISPLS(*), SENDTYPE, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, ROOT, 
COMM, IERROR 

MPI_SCATTERV is the inverse operation to MPI_GATHERV. MPI_SCATTERV extends the functionality of MPI_SCATTER by allowing a varying count of data to be sent to each process, since sendcounts is now an array. It also allows more flexibility as to where the data is taken from on the root, by providing the new argument, displs.

### The outcome is as if the root executed n send operations,

MPI_Send(sendbuf + displs [i] - extent(sendtype), sendcounts [i], _ sendtype, i, ...), and each process executed a receive, MPI-Recv(recvbuf, recvcount, recvtype, i, ...).

The send buffer is ignored for all non-root processes. The type signature implied by sendcount[i], sendtype at the root must be equal to the type signature implied by recvcount, recvtype at process i (however, the type maps may be different). This implies that the amount of data sent must be equal to the amount of data received, pairwise between each process and the root. Distinct type maps between sender and receiver are still allowed.

Fig. 4.7 The root process scatters sets of 10Q ints to each process in the group.

All arguments to the function are significant on process root, while on other processes, only arguments recvbuf, recvcount, recvtype, root, comm are significant. The arguments root and comm must have identical values on all processes. The specification of counts, types, and displacements should not cause any location on the root to be read more than once.

4.6.’I EXAMPLES USING MPI_SCATTER, MPLSCATTERV

Example 4.11 The reverse of Example 4.2. Scatter sets of 100 ints from the root to each process in the group. See figure 4.7.

MPI_Comm comm;

int gsize,*sendbuf; 
int root, rbuf [100] ; 

~ MPI_Comm_size{ comm, &gsize); sendbuf = (int *)malloc(gsize*100*sizeof(int));

MPI_Scatter( sendbuf, 100, MPI_INT, rbuf, 100, MPI_INT, root, comm); Example 4.12 The reverse of Example 4.5. The root process scatters sets of 100 ints to the other processes, but the sets of 100 are stride ints apart in the sending buffer. Requires use of MPI_SCATTERV. Assume stride > 100. See figure 4.8.

MPI_Comm comm;

int gsize,*sendbuf; 
int root, rbuf[100], i, *displs, *scounts; 
MPI_Comm_size( comm, &gsize); 
sendbuf = (int *)malloc(gsize*stride*sizeof(int)); 

displs = (int *)malloc(gsize*sizeof(int));

Fig. 4.8 The root process scatters sets of 100 ints, moving by stride ints from send to send in the scatter.

Fig. 4.9 The root scatters blocks of 100-i ints into column i of a 100x 150 C array. At the sending side, the blocks are stride [i] ints apart.

scounts = (int *)malloc(gsize*sizeof(int)); 
for (i=0; i<gsize; ++i) { 
displs [i] = i*stride; 
scounts[i] = 100; 

}

MPI_ScattervC sendbuf, scounts, displs, MPI_INT, rbuf, 100, MPI_INT, root, comm);

Example 4.13 The reverse of Example 4.9. We have a varying stride between blocks at sending (root) side, at the receiving side we receive into the ith column of a 1 ~0 x 1 ~0 C array. See figure 4.9.

MPI_Comm comm;

int gsize,recvarray[100][150],*rptr; 
int root, *sendbuf, myrank, bufsize, *stride; 
MPI_Datatype rtype; 
int i, *displs, *scounts, offset; 
MPI_Comm_size( comm, &gsize); 
MPI-Comm-rank( comm, &myrank ); 

stride = (int *)malloc(gsize*sizeof(int));

/* stride[H for i = 0 to gsize-1 is set somehow * sendbuf comes from elsewhere */

displs = (int *)malloc(gsize*sizeof(int)); 
scounts = (int *)malloc(gsize*sizeof(int)); 
offset = 0; 

for (i=0; i<gsize; ++i) ~( displs[il = offset; offset += stride[i]; scounts[i] = 100 - i;

}

/* Create datatype for the column we are receiving %I’

MPI_Type_vector( 100-myrank, 1, 150, MPI_INT, &rtype); 
MPI_Type-commit( &rtype ); 
rptr = &recvarray [0] [myrank] ; 
MPI_Scatterv( sendbuf, scounts, displs, MPI_INT, rptr, 1, rtype, 
root, comm); 

4.7 Gather-to-A!)

MP1~4LLGATHER( sendbuf, sendcount, sendtype, recvbuf, recvcount, recvtype, comm)

. sendbuf starting address of send buffer (choice)

T~ sendcount number of elements in send buffer (integer) IM sendtype data type of send buffer elements (handle) OUT recvbuf address of receive buffer (choice)

IN recvcount number of elements received from any process

(integer) lli recvtype data type of receive buffer elements (handle) IN comm communicator (handle)

int MPI_Allgather(void* sendbuf, int sendcount, MPI-Datatype sendtype,

void* recvbuf, int recvcount, MPI-Datatype recvtype, MPI-Comm comm) MPI-ALLGATHER(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, COMM, IERROR)

 SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) INTEGER SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, COMM, IERROR

MPLALLGATHER can be thought of as MPI_GATHER, but where all processes receive the result, instead of just the root. The jth block of data sent from each process is received by every process and placed in the jth block of the buffer recvbuf. The type signature associated with sendcount, sendtype, at a process must be equal to the type signature associated with recvcount, recvtype at any other process. The outcome of a call to MPI-ALLGATHER(... ) is as if all processes executed n calls to

MPI_GATIiER(sendbuf,sendcount,sendtype,recubuf,recvcount, recvtype,root,comm), for root = o , ... , n-l,. The rules for correct usage of MPI ~ALLGATHER are easily found from the corresponding rules for MPI_GATHER.

MPi~4LLGATHERV( sendbuf, sendcount, sendtype, recvbuf, recvcounts, displs, recvtype, comm)

IN sendbuf starting address of send buffer (choice) IN sendcount number of elements in send buffer (integer) IN sendtype data type of send buffer elements (handle) OUT recvbuf address of receive buffer (choice)

IN recvcounts integer array (of length group size) containing the number of elements that are received from each process

IN displs. integer array (of length groupsize). Entr~ i speci fies the displacement (relative to recvbuf) atwhich to place the incoming data from process i

IN recvtype data type of receive buffer elements (handle) IN Comm communicator (handle)

int MPI-Allgatherv (void* sendbuf, int sendcount, MPI-Datatype sendtype,

void* recvbuf, int *recvcounts, int *displs, MPI-Datatype recvtype, MPI_Comm comm) MPI_ALLGAT~IEH,V(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNTS, DISPLS, RECVTYPE, COMM, IERROR) SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) -INTEGER SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, REGVCOUNTS(*), DISPLS(*), RECVTYPE, COMM, IERROR

MPLALLGATHERV can be thought of as MPl_GATHERV, but where all pro cesses receive the result, instead of just the root. The jth block of data sent

from each process is received by every process and placed in the j th block of the buffer recvbuf. These blocks need not all be the same size. The type signature associated with sendcounts, sendtype, at process j must be equal to the type signature associated with recvcounts[j], recvtype at any other process. The outcome is as if all processes executed calls to

MPI_GATHERV(sendbuf,sendcount,sendtype,recvbuf,recvcounts,displs, recvtype,root,comm), for root = o , ... , n-1. The rules for correct usage of MP)JBLLGATHERV are easily found from the corresponding rules for MPLGATHERV.

4.7.1 EXAMPLES USING MPLALLGATHER, MPI-ALLGATHERV

Example 4.14 The all-gather version of Example 4.2. Using MPI-ALLGATHER, we will gather 100 ints from every process in the group to every process.

MPI_Comm camm;

int gsize,sendarray~100]; 
int *rbuf ; 
MPI_Comm_size( comm, &gsize); 
rbuf = (int *)malloc(gsize*100*sizeof (int)); 
MPI_Allgather( sendarray, 100, MPI-INT, rbuf, 100, MPI_INT, comm); 

After the call, every process has the group-wide concatenation of the sets of data.

4.8 All-to-All Scatter/Gather

MPI-ALLTOALL(sendbuf, sendcount, sendtype, recvbuf, recvcount, recvtype, 
comm) 
IN sendbuf starting address of send buffer (choice) 
QV sendcount number of elements sent to each process ’ 
(integer) 
IN sendtype data type of send buffer elements (handle) 
OUT recvbuf address of receive buffer (choice) 

IN recvcount number of elements received from any process .

(integer) DM recvtype data type of receive buffer elements (handle) BO comm communicator (handle)

int MPI-Elltoall(void* sendbuf, int sendcount, MPI-Datatype sendtype, ~ void* recvbuf, int recvcount, MPI-Datatype recvtype, MPI_Comm comm) ,

MPI-ALLTOALL(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNT, SEN17TYPE, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, 
COMM, IERROR) 
 SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) 
INTEGER SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, COMM, IERROR 
MPLALLTOALL is an extension of MP1~4LLGATHER to the case where each 
process sends distinct data to each of the receivers. The jth block sent from 
process i is received by process j and is placed in the ith block of recvbuf. 
The type signature associated with sendcount, sendtype, at a process must 

be equal to the type signature associated with recvcount, recvtype at any other process. This implies that the amount of data sent must be equal to the amount of data received, pairwise between every pair of processes. As usual, however, the type maps may be different.

#### The outcome is as if each process executed a send to each process (itself included) with a call to, MPI-Send(sendbuf + i ’ sendcount - extent(sendtype), sendcount,

sendtype, i, ...),

and a receive from every other process with a call to,

MPI_Recv{recvbuf + i - recvcount ~ extent(recvtype), recvcount, i, ...).

Ail arguments on all processes are significant. The argument comm must have identical values on all processes. MPI-ALLTOALLV(sendbuf, sendcounts, sdispls, sendtype, recvbuf, recvcounts, rdispls, recvtype, comm) IN sendbuf starting address of send buffer (choice) IN sendcounts integer array equal to the group size specifying the number of elements to send to each processor IN sdispls integer array (of length group size). Entry j spec ifies the displacement (relative to sendbuf from

| | IN | | | sendtype | data type of send buffer elements (handle) | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | OUT | | | recvbuf | address of receive buffer (choice) | |
| | IN | | | recvcounts | integer array equal to the group size specifying | |
| | | | | | the number of elements that can be received from | |

which to take the outgoing data destined for pro cess j i each processor

IN rdlSpls integerarray (of length group size). Entry i speci fies the displacement (relative to recvbuf at which to place the incoming data from process i

IN recvtype data type of receive buffer elements (handle) IN comm communicator (handle)

int MPI-Alltoallv(void* sendbuf, int *sendcounts, int *sdispls, 
MPI-Datatype sendtype, void* recvbuf, int *recvcounts, 
int *rdispls, MPI_Datatype recvtype, MPI-Comm comm) 
MPI_ALLTOALLV(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNTS, SDISPLS, SENDTYPE, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNTS, 
RDISPLS, RECVTYPE, COMM, IERROR) 
 SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) 
INTEGER SENDCOUNTS(*), SDISPLS(*), SENDTYPE, RECVCOUNTS(*), RDISPLS(*), 
RECVTYPE, COMM, IERROR 
MPLALLTOALLV adds flexibility to MPLALLTOALL in that the location of 
data for the send is specified by sdispls and the location of the placement of the 
data on the receive side is specified by rdispls. 
The j th block sent from process i is received by process j and is placed in 
the ith block of recvbuf. These blocks need not all have the same size. 
The type signature associated with sendcount[j], sendtype at process i must 

be equal to the type signature associated with recvcount[i], recvtype at process j. This implies that the amount of data sent must be equal to the amount of data received, pairwise between every pair of processes. Distinct type maps between sender and receiver are still allowed. The outcome is as if each process sent a message to every other process with, MPI_Send(sendbuf + displs [I ] . extent(sendtype), sendcounts[i], sendtype, i ... ),

and received a message from every other process with a call to

XPI-Recv(recvbuf + displs[i] ’ extent(recvtype), recvcounts(i~, recvtype, i ... ). All arguments on all processes are significant. The argument comm must

have identical values on all processes.

Rationale. The definitions of MPLALLTOALL and MPLALLTOALLV give as much flexibility as one would achieve by specifying n independent, point to-point communications, with two exceptions: all messages use the same datatype, and messages are scattered from (or gathered to) sequential storage. (End of rationale.)

Advice to !?K~?7M’~o~. Although the discussion of collective communi cation in terms of point-to-point operation implies that each message is transferred directly from sender to receiver, implementations may use a tree communication pattern. Messages can be forwarded by intermediate nodes where they are split (for scatter) or concatenated (for gather), if this is more efficient. (End of advice to imple.mentors.)

##### 4.9 Global Reduction Operations

The functions in this section perform a global reduce operation (such as sum, max, logical AND, etc.) across all the members of a group. The reduction operation can be either one of a predefined list of operations, or a user-defined operation. The global reduction functions come in several flavors: a reduce that returns the result of the reduction at one node, an all-reduce that returns this result at all nodes, and a scan (parallel prefix) operation. In addition, a reduce-scatter operation combines the functionality of a reduce and of a scatter

### operation.

4.9.1 REDUCE

MPLREDUCE( sendbuf, recvbuf, count, datatype, op, root, comm)

IN sendbuf address of send buffer (choice) 
OUT recvbuf address of receive buffer (choice, significant only 
at root) 
IN Count number of elements in send buffer (integer) 
IN, datatype data type of elements of send buffer (handle) 
:IN 
’ 

op reduce operation (handle) IN root rank of root process (integer) IN comm communicator (handle)

int MPI-Reduce(void* sendbuf, void* recvbuf, int count, MPI~atatype datatype, MPI_Op op, int root, MPI_Comm comm)

MFI~EDUCE(SENDBUF, RECVBUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, OP, ROOT, COMM, IERROR) 
 SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) 
INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, OP, ROOT, COMM, IERROR 
MPI_REDUCE combines the elements provided in the input buffer of each 
process in the group, using the operation op, and returns the combined value 
in the output buffer of the process with rank root. The input buffer is defined 
by the arguments sendbuf, count and datatype; the output buffer is defined 

by the arguments recvbuf, count and datatype; both have the same number of elements, with the same type. The routine is called by all group members using the same arguments for count, datatype, op, root and comm. Thus, all processes provide input buffers and output buffers of the same length, with elements of the same type. Each process can provide one element, or a sequence of elements, in which case the combine operation is executed element-wise on each entry of the sequence. For example, if the operation is MPI_MAX and the send buffer contains two elements that are floating point numbers (count = 2 and datatype = MPI_FLOAT), then recvbuf(1 ) = global max(sendbuf(1)) and recvbuf(2) = global max(sendbuf(2)).

Section 4.9.2, lists the set of predefined operations provided by MPI. That section also enumerates the datatypes each operation can be applied to. In addition, users may define their own operations that can be overloaded to op erate on several datatypes, either basic or derived. This is further explained in Section 4.9.4. The operation op is always assumed to be associative. All predefined oper ations are also assumed to be commutative. Users may define operations that are assumed to be associative, but not commutative. The &dquo;canonical&dquo; evaluation order of a reduction is determined by the ranks of the processes in the group. However, the implementation can take advantage of associativity, or associativity and commutativity in order to change the order of evaluation. This may change the result of the reduction for operations that are not strictly associative and commutative, such as floating point addition. _ Advice to implementors. It is strongly recommended that MPI-REDUCE be implemented so that the same result will be obtained whenever the function is applied on the same arguments, appearing in the same order.

Note that this may prevent optimizations that take advantage of the physical location of processors. (End of advice to i~n~blerrcen~ors.) The datatype argument of MPI_REDUCE must be compatible with op. Pre defined operators work only with the MPI types listed in Section 4.9.2 and Sec tion 4.9.3. User-defined operators may operate on general, derived datatypes. In this case, each argument that the reduce operation is applied to is one ele ment described by such a datatype, which may contain several basic values. This is further explained in Section 4.9.4. 4.9.2 PREDEFINED REDUCE OPERATIONS The following predefined operations are supplied for MPLREDUCE and related functions MPI-ALLREDUCE, MPI_REDUCE_SCATTER, and MPI_SCAN. These op erations are invoked by placing the following in op.

### Name Meaning

M PI_MAX maximum MPI-MIN minimum MPI_SUM sum MPI_PROD

~

product MPI_LAND logical and MPI_BAND bit-wise and MPI-LOR logical or MPI_BOR bit-wise or Mpl_LXOR logical xor MPI_BXOR bit-wise xor MPI_MAXLOC max value and location

MPI-MINLOC min value and location

The two operations MPI-MINLOC and MPI_MAXLOC are discussed separately in Sec. 4.9.3. For the other predefined operations, we enumerate below the allowed combinations of op and datatype arguments. First, define groups of MPI basic datatypes in the following way.

C integer: MP9~INT, MPI_LONG, MP1_SHORT, 
MPI_UNSIGNED_SHORT, MPI_UNSIGNED, 
MPI_UNSIGNED_LONG 
Fortran integer: MPI-INTEGER 
Floating point: MPI_FLOAT, MPI_DOUBLE, MPI_REAL, 
MPI-DOUBLE PRECISION, 
MPI-LONG-DOUBLE 
Logical: MP1_LOGIGAL 
Complex: MPI-COMPLEX 
Byte: M Pi _BYTE 

### Now, the valid datatypes for each option are specified below.

##### Op Allowed Types

MPI_MAX, tv)PLM)N C integer, Fortran integer, Floating point MPI_SUM, MPI_PROD C integer, Fortran integer, Floating point

MP4_LAND, MPI_LOR, MPI_LXOR C integer, Logical MPI_BAND, MPI_BOR, MPI-BXOR C integer, Fortran integer, Byte

Example 4.15 A routine that computes the dot product of two vectors that are distributed across a group of processes and returns the answer at node zero.

SUBROUTINE PAR_BLAS1(~n, a, b, c, comm)

REAL a(m), b(m) ! local slice of array REAL c ! result (at node zero) REAL sum

INTEGER m, comm, i, ierr

! local sum

sum = 0.0 
DO i = 1, m 
sum = sum + a(i)*b(i) 
END DO 

! global sum

CALL MPI_REDUCE(sum, c, 1, MPI_REAL, MPI_SUM, 0, comm, ierr) RETURN

Example 4.16 A routine that computes the product of a vector and an array that are distributed across a group of processes and returns the answer at node zero.

SUBROUTINE PAR_BLAS2(m, n, a, b, c, comm)

REAL a(m), b(m,n) local slice of array REAL c(n) ! result REAL sum(n)

INTEGER n, comm, i, j, ierr

! local sum

DO j= 1, n sum(j) = 0.0 DO i = 1, m

sum(j) = sum(j) + a(i)*b(i,j) END DO END DO

! global sum CALL MPI_REDUCE(sum, c, n, MPI_REAL, MPI_SUM, 0, comm, ierr)

! return result at node zero (and garbage at the other nodes) RETURN

4.9.3 MINLOC AND MAXLOC

The operator MPI-MINLOC is used to compute a global minimum and also an index attached to the minimum value. MP!_MAXLOC similarly computes a global maximum and index. One application of these is to compute a global minimum (maximum) and the rank of the process containing this value. The operation that defines MPI_MAXLOC is:

where

zu = max(u, v)

and

### MPI-MINLOC is defined similarly:

294 where

z~ = min(u, v)

and

Both operations are associative and commutative. Note that if MPI_MAXLOC is applied to reduce a sequence of pairs (uo, 0), (ul, 1), ... , (u.-I, n - 1), then the value returned is (u. r), where u = max, ic7 and r is the index of the first global maximum in the sequence. Thus, if each process supplies a value and its rank within the group, then a reduce operation with op = MPI_MAXLOC will return the maximum value and the rank of the first process with that value. Similarly, MPI_MINLOC can be used to return a minimum and its index. More generally, MPI_MINLOC computes a lexicographic minimum, where elements are ordered according to the first component of each pair, and ties are resolved according to the second component. The reduce operation is defined to operate on arguments that consist of a pair: value and index. For both Fortran and C, types are provided to describe the pair. The potentially mixed-type nature of such arguments is a problem in

Fortran. The problem is circumvented, for Fortran, by having the MPI-provided type consist of a pair of the same type as value, and coercing the index to this type also. In C, the MPI-provided pair type has distinct types and the index is an int.

In order to use MPI_MINLOC and MPI_MAXLOC in a reduce operation, one must provide a datatype argument that represents a pair (value and index). MPI provides seven such predefined datatypes. The operations MPI_MAXLOC and MPI_MINLOC can be used with each of the following datatypes.

Fortran:

Name Description 
MPI_2REAL pair of REALs 
MPl-2DOUBLE-PRECISION pair of DOUBLE PRECISION variables 
MPI_2fNTEGER pair of INTEGERs 

’C.:

Name Description MPI_FLOAT_INT float and int MPI_DOUBLE_INT double and int MPI_LONG_INT long and int MPI_21NT pair of int MPLSHORT-INT short and int

MPI_LONG_DOUBLE_INT

~

long double and int

The datatype MPI_2REAL is as if defined by the following (see Section 3.12).

MPI-TYPE-CONTIGUOUS(2, MPI_REAL, MPI_2REAL) ,

Similar statements apply for MPI-21NTEGER, MPI_2DOUBLE_PRECISION, and MPt-21NT. The datatype MPLFLOATJNT is as if defined by the following sequence of instructions.

type [0] = MPI_FLOAT type [1] = MPI_INT disp [0] = 0

disp [1] = sizeof (float) , block[0] = 1 .

block [1] - 1 MPI_TYPE_STRUCT(2, block, disp, type, MPI-FLOAT-INT)

Similar statements apply for MPI_LONG_INT and MPI-DOUBLE-INT.

Example 4.17 Each process has an array of 30 doubles, in C. For each of the

### 30 locations, compute the value and rank of the process containing the largest value.

/* each process has an array of 30 double: ain[30] 
*/ 
double ain [30] , aout [30] ; 
int ind [30] ; 
struct 
double val; 
int rank; 
i.n [30] , out [3(?] ; < 
int i, myrank, root; 
MPI-Comm-rank(MPI-COMM-WORLD, &myrank); 
for (i=0; i<30; ++i) 
in [i] . val = ain [i] ; 
xn[i].rank = myrank; 

}

MPI_Reduce( in, out, 30, MPI-DOUBLE_INT, MPI_MAXLOC, root, comm );

/* At this point, the answer resides on process root 
*/ 
if (myrank == root) ~ , 

/* read ranks out */ .

for (i=O; i<30; ++i) { aout [i] = out [ia . val.; ind [i] - out [i] . rank ;

} )

Example 4.18 Same example, in Fortran.

! each process has an array of 30 double: ain(30)

DOUBLE PRECISION ain(30), aout(30) INTEGER ind(30); DOUBLE PRECISION in(2,30), out(2,30)

INTEGER i, myrank, root, ierr;

MPT_COMM_RANFC(MFI_Cf7MM_WORLD, myrank); DO I=1, 30 in(l,i) = ain(i) in(2,i) = myrank ! myrank is coerced to a double

END DO

MPI REDUCE( in_, out, 30, MPI_2DOUBLE_PRECISION, MPI_MAXLOC, root,

comm, ierr );

! At this point, the answer resides on process root

IF (myrank EQ . root) THEN

! read ranks out DO 1= 1, 30 aout(i) = out(i,i) ind(i) = out(2,i) ! rank is coerced back to an integer

END DO END IF

Example 4.19 Each process has a non-empty array of values. Find the minimum global value, the rank of the process that holds it and its index on this process. #define LEN 1000

float val[LEN]; /* local array of values */ int count; /* local number of values */

int myrank, minrank, minindex; 
float minval; 

struct { float value;

int index; ) in, out ;

/* local minloc */ in . value - val [0] ;

in.index = 0;

for (i=l; i < count; i++)

if (in.value > val [i] ) { in. value = val [i] ;

in.index = i;

}

/* global minloc */

MPI_Comm_rankCMPI_COMM_WORLD, &myrank); 
in.index = 
myrank*LEN + in.index; 
MPI_Reduce( in, out, 1, MPI_FLOAT_INT, MPI_MINL~OC, root, comm ); 

/* At this point, the answer resides on process root */ if (myrank == root) {

/* read answer out */ minval = out.value; minrank = out.index / LEN; minindex = out.index % LEN;

}

Rationale. The definition of MPI-MINLOC and MPI-MAXLOC given here has the advantage that it does not require any special-case handling of these two operations: they are handled like any other reduce operation. A programmer can provide his or her own definition of MPI_MAXLOC and MPI_MINLOC, if so desired. The disadvantage is that values and indices have to be first interleaved, and that indices and values have to be coerced to the same type, in Fortran. (End of rationa~e. )

4.9.4 USER-DEFINED OPERATIONS

##### MPI_OP_CR~ATE( function, commute, op)

| | M | | | function | | user-defined function (function) | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | IN | | | commute | | true if commutative; false otherwise. | |
| | OUT | | | op | | operation (handle) | |

int MPI_Op_create(MPI_User_function *function, int commute, MPI_Op *op) . 
MPI-OP-CREATE( FUNCTION, COMMUTE, OP, IERROR) 
EXTERNAL FUNCTION 
LOGICAL COMMUTE 
INTEGER OP, IERROR 

MPI_OP_CREATE binds a user-defined global operation to an op handle that can subsequently be used in MPI_REDUCE, MP1.~4LLREDUCE, MPLREDUCE SCATTER, and MPI_SCAN. The user-defined operation is assumed to be associa tive. If commute = true, then the operation should be both commutative and associative. If commute = false, then the order of operations is fixed and is defined to be in ascending, process rank order, beginning with process zero. function is the user-defined function, which must have the following four arguments: invec, inoutvec, len and datatype. The ANSI-C prototype for the function is the following.

typedef void MPI_User_function( void *invec, void *inoutvec, int *len, MPI_Datatype *datatype); The Fortran declaration of the user-defined function appears below. FUNCTION USER_FUNCTION( INVEC(*), INOUTVEC(*), LEN, TYPE) INUEC(LEN), INOUTVEC(LEN) INTEGER LEN, TYPE The datatype argument is a handle to the data type that was passed into the call to MPI_REDUCE. The user reduce function should be written such that the following holds: Let u[0], ... , u[len - 1] be the len elements in the commu nication buffer described by the arguments invec, len and datatype when the function is invoked; let v[01, ... , v[len - 1] be len elements in the communi cation buffer described by the arguments inoutvec, len and datatype when the function is invoked; let w[0], ... , w[len - 1] be len elements in the communi cation buffer described by the arguments inoutvec, len and datatype when the function returns; then w[i] = u[i]ov[i], for I = 0 , ... , len - 1, where o is the reduce operation that the function computes. Informally, we can think of invec and inoutvec as arrays of len elements that function is combining. The result of the reduction over-writes values in inoutvec, hence the name. Each invocation of the function results in the point wise evaluation of the reduce operator on len elements: i.e, the function returns in inoutvec[i] the value invec[i] o inoutvec[i], for i = 0, ... , count - 1, where o is the combining operation computed by the function. Rationale. The len argument allows MPI-REDUCE to avoid calling the function for each element in the input buffer. Rather, the system can choose to apply the function to chunks of input. In C, it is passed in as a reference for reasons of compatibility with Fortran. By internally comparing the value of the datatype argument to known,

global handles, it is possible to overload the use of a single user-defined

function for several, different data types. (End af rrztionale.) General datatypes may be passed to the user function. However, use of datatypes that are not contiguous is likely to lead to inefficiencies. No MPI communication function may be called inside the user function. MP1~4BORT may be called inside the function in case of an error.

Advice to users. Suppose one defines a library of user-defined reduce func tions that are overloaded: the datatype argument is used to select the right execution path at each invocation, according to the types of the operands. The user-defined reduce function cannot &dquo;decode&dquo; the datatype argument that it is passed, and cannot identify, by itself, the correspondence between the datatype handles and the datatype they represent. This correspon dence was established when the datatypes were created. Before the library is used, a library initialization preamble must be executed. This preamble code will define the datatypes that are used by the library, and store han dles to these datatypes in global, static variables that are shared by the user code and the library code. The Fortran version of MPI_REDUCE will invoke a user-defined reduce function using the Fortran calling conventions and will pass a Fortran-type datatype argument; the C version will use C calling convention and the

C representation of a datatype handle. Users who plan to mix languages 
should define their reduction functions accordingly. (End af advice to users.) 
Advice to implementors. We outline below a naive and inefficient implemen 
tation of MPI_REDUCE. 
if (rank > o) 
RECV(tempbuf, count, datatype, rank-1,...) 
User_reduce( tempbuf, sendbuf, count, datatype) 

.Y

if (rank < groupsize-1) ( SEND( sendbuf, count, datatype, rank+1, ...)

}

/* answer now resides in process groupsize-I ... now send to root 
*/ 
if (rank == groupsize-1) { 
SEND( sendbuf, count, datatype, root, ...) 

}

if (rank == root) { RECV(recvbuf, count, datatype, gronpsize-1,...)

i

The reduction computation proceeds, sequentially, from process 0 to process groupsize-1. This order is chosen so as to respect the order of a possibly non-commutative operator defined by the function user-reduce O.

A more efficient implementation is achieved by taking advantage of as sociativity and using a logarithmic tree reduction. Commutativity can be used to advantage, for those cases in which the commute argument to

MP1_OP_CREATE is true. Also, the amount of temporary buffer required can be reduced, and communication can be pipelined with computation, by transferring and reducing the elements in chunks of size len <count.

The predefined reduce operations can be implemented as a library of user-defined operations. However, better performance might be achieved if MPi_REDUCE handles these functions as a special case. (End of advice to

#### implementors.)

MPI_OP_FREE( op)

IN op operation (handle)

int MPI-op-free( MPI-Op *op)

MPI-OP-FREE( OP, IERROR) INTEGER OP, IERROR

Marks a user-defined reduction operation for deallocation and sets op to

MPLOP-NULL.

Example of User-defined Reduce 
It is time for an example of user-defined reduction. 
Example 4.20 Compute the product of an array of complex numbers, in C. 
typedef struct { 
double real,imag; 
} Complex; 

/* the user-defined function */ void myProd( Complex *in, Complex *inout, int *len, MPI-Datatype *dptr ) i

int i;

Complex c;

for (i=0; i< *len; ++i) { c.real = inout->real*in->real inout->imag*in->imag ;

c.imag

= inout->real*in->imag + inout->imag*in->real;

*inout = c;

in++; inout++;

}

’

)

/* and, to call it... */

/* each process has an array of 100 Complexes 
*/ 
Complex a [100] , answer [100] ; 
MPI_Op myop; 
MPI_Datatype ctype; 

/* explain to MPI how type Complex is defined */

MPI_Type_contiguous( 2, MPI-DOUBLE, l~ctype ); 
MPI_Type_commit( &ctype ); 

/* create the complex-product user-op */ MPI_Op_create( myProd, True, &my(3p ) ;

MPI_Reduce( a, answer, 100, ctype, my0p, root, comm );

/* At this point, the answer, which consists of 100 Complexes, 
* resides on process root 
~/ 

4.9.5 ALL-REDUCE

MPI includes variants of each of the reduce operations where the result is re turned to all processes in the group. MPI requires that all processes participating in these operations receive identical results.

MP!-ALLREDUCE( sendbuf, recvbuf, count, datatype, op, comm) IN sendbuf starting address of send buffer (choice) OUT recvbuf starting address of receive buffer (choice) IN count number of elements in send buffer (integer) 1N datatype data type of elements of send buffer (handle) IN op operation (handle) W Comm communicator (handle)

int MPI_Allreduce(void* sendbuf, void* recvbuf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, MPI_Op op, MPI-Comm comm)

MPI-ALLREDUCE(SENDBUF, RECVBUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, OP, COMM, IERROR.) 
 SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) 
INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, OP, COMM, IERROR 
Same as MPI_REDUGE except that the result appears in the receive buffer of 
all the group members. 

Advice to implementors. The all-reduce operations can be implemented as a reduce, followed by a broadcast. However, a direct implementation can lead to better performance. (End of advice to implementors.)

Example 4.21 A routine that computes the product of a vector and an array that are distributed across a group of processes and returns the answer at all nodes (see also Example 4.16). _ SUBROUTINE PAR_BLAS2(m, n, a, b, c, comm)

REAL a(m), b(m,n) ! local slice of array 
REAL c(n) ! result 
REAL sum(n) 
INTEGER n, comm, i, j, ierr 

! local sum

DO j= 1, n sum(j) = 0.0 . DO i = 1, m

=

sum(j)

sum(j) + a(i)*b(i,j)

END DO END DO ! global sum

CALL MPI_ALLREDUCE(sum, c, n, MPI_REAL, MPI_SUM, 0, comm, ierr)

! return result at all nodes RETURN

4.10 Reduce-Scatter

MPI includes variants of each of the reduce operations where the result is scat tered to all processes in the group on return.

| | IN | | | | sendbuf | starting address of send buffer (choice) | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | OUT | | | | recvbuf | starting address of receive buffer (choice) | |
| | IN | | | | recvcounts | integer array specifying the number of elements | |
| | | | | | | in result distributed to each process. Array must | |

MPI_REDUCE_S~CATTER( sendbuf, recvbuf, recvcounts, datatype, op, comm)

be identical on all calling processes.

iN datatype data type of elements of input buffer (handle) ~ op

.

operation (handle) IN comm communicator (handle)

int MPI-Reduce-scatter(void* sendbuf, void* recvbuf, int *recvcounts, 
MPI-Datatype datatype, MPI_Dp op, MPI_Comm comm) 
MPIJREDUCE_SCATTER(SENDBUF, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNTS, DATATYPE, OP, COMM, IERROR) 
 SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) 
INTEGER RECVCOUNTS(*), DATATYPE, OP, COMM, IERROR 
MPI_REDUCE_SCATTER first does an element-wise reduction on vector of 
count = Lí recvcounts[i] elements in the send buffer defined by sendbuf, 

count and datatype. Next, the resulting vector of results is split into n disjoint segments, where n is the number of members in the group. Segment i contains recvcounts[i] elements. The ith segment is sent to process i and stored in the receive buffer defined by recvbuf, recvcounts[i] and datatype. Advice to i~rc~leme~tors. The MPI-REDUCE-SCATTER routine is functionally equivalent to: A MPI_REDUCE operation function with count equal to the sum of recvcounts[il followed by MPI_SCATTERV with sendcounts equal to recvcounts. However, a direct implementation may run faster. (End of

#### advice to implernentors. )

4.11 Scan

MPI_SCAN( sendbuf, recvbuf, count, datatype, op, comm )

IN sendbuf starting address of send buffer (choice) OUT recvbuf starting address of receive buffer (choice)

IN count number of elements in input buffer (integer) IN datatype data type of elements of input buffer (handle) iN Op operation (handle) iN comm communicator (handle)

int 1~CPI_Sca~(void* sendbuf , void* recvbuf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, 
MPI_Op op, MPI-Comm comm ) 
MPI-SCAN(SENDBUF, RECVBUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, OP, COMM, IERROR) 
 SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) 
INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, OP, COMM, IERROR 

MPI_SCAN is used to perform a prefix reduction on data distributed across the group. The operation returns, in the receive buffer of the process with rank i, the reduction of the values in the send buffers of processes with ranks

o,... ,i (inclusive). The type of operations supported, their semantics, and the constraints on send and receive buffers are as for MP~_REDUC~. ,Rationale. We have defined an inclusive scan, that is, the prefix reduction on process i includes the data from process i. An alternative is to define scan in an exclusive manner, where the result on i only includes data up to i-1. Both definitions are useful. The latter has some advantages: the inclusive scan can always be computed from the exclusive scan with no additional communication; for non-invertible operations such as max and min, communication is required to compute the exclusive scan from the inclusive scan. There is, however, a complication with exclusive scan since one must define the &dquo;unit&dquo; element for the reduction in this case. That is, one must explicitly say what occurs for process o. This was thought to be complex for user-defined operations and hence, the exclusive scan was

### dropped. (End of rationale.)

4.11.1 EXAMPLE USING MPI-SCAN

Example 4.22 This example uses a user-defined operation to produce a segmented scan. A segmented scan takes, as input, a set of values and a set of logicals, and the logicals delineate the various segments of the scan. For example:

The operator that produces this effect is,

where,

Note that this is a non-commutative operator. C code that implements it is given below. typedef struct { double val; int log; } SegScanPair

/* the user-defined function 
*/ 
void segScan( SegScanPair *in, SegScanPair *inout, int *len, 
MPI_Datatype *dptr ) 
{ 

305 int i;

SegScanPair c;

for (i=O; i< *len; ++i) { if ( in->log == inout->log )

c.val = in->val + inout->val;

else

c.val = inout->val; c.log = inout->log; *inout = c;

in++; inout++;

} }

Note that the inout argument to the user-defined function corresponds to the right-hand operand of the operator. When using this operator, we must be careful to specify that it is non-commutative, as in the following.

int i,base;

SeqScanPair a, answer; 
MPI_Op myop; 
MPI_Datatype type[2] _ -[MPI_DOUBLE, MPT-INT~; 
MPI_Aint disp [2] ; 
int blocklen[2] = { 1, 1)-; 
MPI_Datatype sspair; 
/* explain to MPI how type SegScanPair is defined 
*/ 
MPI_Address( a, disp); 

MPI-Address( a.log, disp+1); base =

disp[0] ; for (i=0; i<2; ++i) disp[i] -= base; MPI_Type_struct( 2, blocklen, disp, type, &sspair MPI_Type_commit( &sspair );

/* create the segmented-scan user-op */

MPI-Op-create( segScan, False, BcmyDp );

MPI_Scan( a, answer, 1, sspair, my0p, root, comm );

4.12 Correctness A correct, portable program must invoke collective communications so that deadlock will not occur, whether collective communications are synchronizing or not. The following examples illustrate dangerous use of collective routines.

Example 4.23 The following is erroneous.

switch(rank) { ~

case 0:

MPI-Bcast(bufl, count, type, 0, comm); 
MPI_Bcast(buf2, count, type, 1, comm); 
break; 

case 1:

MPI_Bcast(buf2, count, type, 1, comm); 
MPI_Bcast(bufl, count, type, 0, comm); 
break; 

~

We assume that the group of comm is {0,1}. Two processes execute two broadcast operations in reverse order. If the operation is synchronizing then a deadlock will occur.

Collective operations must be executed in the same order at all members of the communication group.

Example 4.24 The following is erroneous.

switch(rank) {

case 0:

MPI_Bcast(bufl, count, type, 0, comm0); 
MPI_Bcast(buf2, count, type, 2, comm2); 

.

break; case 1:

MPI_Bcast(bufl, count, type, 1, comml); MPI_Bcast(buf2, count, type, 0, comm0); break; case 2:

MPI_Bcast(bufi, count, type, 2, comm2); , MPI-Bcast(buf2, count, type, 1, comml); break;

-

. -

Assume that the group ofcomm0 is {0,1}, of comm1 is 11, 2} and of comm2 is {2,0}. If the broadcast is a synchronizing operation, then there is a cyclic dependency: the broadcast in comm2 completes only after the broadcast in commO; the broadcast in commO completes only after the broadcast in comm1; and the broadcast in comml completes only after the broadcast in comm2. Thus, the code will deadlock.

### Collective operations must be executed in an order so that no cyclic depen dences occur.

Example 4.25 The following is erroneous.

switch(rank) { >

case 0:

MPI_Bcast(bufl, count, type, 0, comm)); 
MPI_Send(buf2, count, type, 1, tag, comm); 
break; 

°

case 1:

1~IPI_Recv(buf2, count, type, 0, tag, comm); MPI_Bcast{buf3., count, type, 0, comm); §

’

break;

’)

Process zero executes a broadcast, followed by a blocking send operation. Process one first executes a blocking receive that matches the send, followed by broadcast call that matches the broadcast of process zero. This program may deadlock. The broadcast call on process zero may block until process one executes the matching broadcast call, so that the send is not executed. Process one will definitely block on the receive and so, in this case, never executes the broadcast.

°

The relative order of execution of collective operations and point-to-point operations should be such, so that even if the collective operations and the point-to-point operations are synchronizing, no deadlock will occur.

Example 4.26 A correct, but non-deterministic program. switch(rank) ~{

case 0:

MPI_Bcast(buf1, count, type, 0, comm); MPI_Send(buf2, count, type, 1, tag, comm); _ break; case 1:

MPI_Recv(buf2, count, type, MPI_ANY_SOUR.CE, tag, comm); MPI_Bcast(bufl, count, type, 0, comm); MPI_Recv(buf2, count, type, MPI_ANY_SOURCE, tag, comm); break; case 2:

MPI_Send(buf2, count, type, 1, tag, comm); 
MPI_Bcast(bufl, count, type, 0, comm); 
break; 
. 

All three processes participate in a broadcast. Process 0 sends a message to process 1 after the broadcast, and process 2 sends a message to process 1 before the broadcast. Process 1 receives before and after the broadcast, with a wildcard source argument. Two possible executions of this program, with different matchings of sends and receives, are illustrated in figure 4.10. Note that the second execution has

Fig. 4.10 A race condition causes non-deterministic matching of sends and receives. One cannot rely on synchronization from a broadcast to make the program determin istic.

the peculiar effect that a send executed after the broadcast is received at another node before the broadcast. This example illustrates the fact that one should not rely on collective communication functions to have particular synchronization effects. A program that works correctly only when the first execution occurs (only when broadcast is synchronizing) is erroneous.

Finally, in multi-threaded implementations, one can have more than one, concurrently executing, collective communication call at a process. In these situations, it is the user’s responsibility to ensure that the same communicator is not used concurrently by two different collective communication calls at the same process.

#### Advice to implementors. Assume that broadcast is implemented using point to-point MPI communication. Suppose the following two rules are fol lowed.

1. All receives specify their source explicitly (no wildcards). 2. Each process sends all messages that pertain to one collective call before sending any messages that pertain to a subsequent collective call.

### Then, messages belonging to successive broadcasts cannot be confused, as the order of point-to-point messages is preserved.

It is the implementor’s responsibility to ensure that point-to-point mes sages are not confused with collective messages. One way to accomplish this is, whenever a communicator is created, to also create a &dquo;hidden com municator&dquo; for collective communication. One could achieve a similar effect more cheaply, for example, by using a hidden tag or context bit to indicate whether the communicator is used for point-to-point or collective communication. (End of advice to implementors.)

GROUPS, CONTEXTS, AND COMMUNICATORS

5.1 Introduction

This chapter introduces MPI features that support the development of parallel libraries. Parallel libraries are needed to encapsulate the distracting compli cations inherent in parallel implementations of key algorithms. They help to ensure consistent correctness of such procedures, and provide a &dquo;higher level&dquo; of portability than MPI itself can provide. As such, libraries prevent each program mer from repeating the work of defining consistent data structures, data layouts, and methods that implement key algorithms (such as matrix operations). Since the best libraries come with several variations on parallel systems (different data layouts, different strategies depending on the size of the system or problem, or type of floating point), this too needs to be hidden from the user.

### We refer the reader to [26] and [3] for further information on writing libraries in MPI, using the features described in this chapter.

5.1.1 FEATURES NEEDED TO SUPPORT LIBRARIES The key features needed to support the creation of robust parallel libraries are as follows: , . Safe communication space, that guarantees that libraries can communicate as they need to, without conflicting with communication extraneous to the

library, 
. Group scope for collective operations, that allow libraries to avoid unneces 
sarily synchronizing uninvolved processes (potentially running unrelated 
code ) , 
~ Abstract process naming to allow libraries to describe their communication 

in terms suitable to their own data structures and algorithms, . The ability to &dquo;adorn&dquo; a set of communicating processes with additional user-defined attributes, such as extra collective operations. This mecha nism should provide a means for the user or library writer effectively to extend a message-passing notation.

a

In addition, a unified mechanism or object is needed for conveniently denot 
ing communication context, the group of communicating processes, to house 
abstract process naming, and to store adornments. 
5.1.2 MPI’S SUPPORT FOR LIBRARIES 

### The corresponding concepts that MPI provides, specifically to support robust libraries, are as follows:

. Contexts of communication, 
. Groups of processes, 
. Virtual topologies, 
. Attribute caching, 
. Communicators. 
Communicators (see [16, 24, 27]) encapsulate all of these ideas in order to pro 
vide the appropriate scope for all communication operations in MPI. Commu 
nicators are divided into two kinds: intra-communicators for operations within 
a single group of processes, and inter-communicators, for point-to-point com 

munication between two groups of processes.

Caching. Communicators (see below) provide a &dquo;caching&dquo; mechanism that allows one to associate new attributes with communicators, on a par with MPI built-in features. This can be used by advanced users to adorn communicators further, and by MP) to implement some communicator functions. For example, the virtual topology functions described in Chapter 6 are likely to be supported this way. Groups. Groups define an ordered collection of processes, each with a rank, and it is this group that defines the low-level names for inter-process communi cation (ranks are used for sending and receiving). Thus, groups define a scope for process names in point-to-point communication. In addition, groups define the scope of collective operations. Groups may be manipulated separately from communicators in MPI, but only communicators can be used in communication

#### operations.

Intra-communicatoo~s. The most commonly used means for message passing in MPI is via intra-communicators. Intra-communicators contain an instance of a group, contexts of communication for both point-to-point and collective communication, and the ability to include virtual topology and other attributes. These features work as follows: . Contexts provide the ability to have separate safe &dquo;universes&dquo; of message passing in MPI. A context is akin to an additional tag that differentiates messages. The system manages this differentiation process. The use of separate communication contexts by distinct libraries (or distinct library invocations) insulates communication internal to the library execution from external communication. This allows the invocation of the library even if there are pending communications on &dquo;other&dquo; communicators,

and avoids the need to synchronize entry or exit into library code. Pending point-to-point communications are also guaranteed not to interfere with collective communications within a single communicator. . Groups define the participants in the communication (see above) of a communicator. . A virtual topology defines a special mapping of the ranks in a group to and from a topology. Special constructors for communicators are defined in chapter 6 to provide this feature. Intra-communicators as described in this

chapter do not have topologies. . Attributes define the local information that the user or library has added to a communicator for later reference. Advice to users. The current practice in many communication libraries is that there is a unique, predefined communication universe that includes all processes available when the parallel program is initiated; the processes are assigned consecutive ranks. Participants in a point-to-point commu nication are identified by their rank; a collective communication (such as broadcast) always involves all processes. This practice can be followed in MPI by using the predefined communicator MPI_COMM_WORLD. Users who are satisfied zuith this practice can plug in MPI-COMM-WORLD wherever a communicators argument is required, and can consequently disregard the rest of this

chapter (End of advice to users.) Inter-communicators. The discussion has dealt so far with intra-communica tion: communication within a group. MPI also supports inter-communication: communication between two non-overlapping groups. When an application is built by composing several parallel modules, it is convenient to allow one module to communicate with another using local ranks for addressing within the second module. This is especially convenient in a client-server comput ing paradigm, where either client or server are parallel. The support of inter communication also provides a mechanism for the extension of MPI to a dynamic model where not all processes are preallocated at initialization time. In such a situation, it becomes necessary to support communication across &dquo;universes.&dquo; Inter-communication is supported by objects called inter-communicators. These objects bind two groups together with communication contexts shared by both groups. For inter-communicators, these features work as follows: . Contexts provide the ability to have a separate safe &dquo;universe&dquo; of message passing between the two groups. A send in the local group is always a receive in the remote group, and vice versa. The system manages this differentiation process. The use of separate communication contexts by distinct libraries (or distinct library invocations) insulates communication

fl

internal to the library execution from external communication. This allows the invocation of the library even if there are pending communications on &dquo;other&dquo; communicators, and avoids the need to synchronize entry or exit into library code. There is no general-purpose collective communication

on inter-communicators, so contexts are used just to isolate point-to-point communication. . A local and remote group specify the recipients and destinations for an inter-communicator. . Virtual topology is undefined for an inter-communicator. 9As before, attributes cache defines the local information that the user or library has added to a communicator for later reference. MPI provides mechanisms for creating and manipulating inter-communica tors. They are used for point-to-point communication in a related manner to intra-communicators. Users who do not need inter-communication in their ap plications can safely ignore this extension. Users who need collective operations via inter-communicators must layer it on top of MPI. Users who require inter communication between overlapping groups must also layer this capability on top of MPI.

5.2 Basic Concepts 
In this section, we turn to a more formal definition of the concepts introduced 
above. 
5.2.1 GROUPS 
A group is an ordered set of process identifiers (henceforth processes); processes 
are implementation-dependent objects. Each process in a group is associated 
with an integer rank. Ranks are contiguous and start from zero. Groups are 
represented by opaque group objects, and hence cannot be directly transferred 
from one process to another. A group is used within a communicator to describe 

the participants in a communication &dquo;universe&dquo; and to rank such participants (thus giving them unique names within that &dquo;universe&dquo; of communication). There is a special predefined group: MPI_GROUP_EMPTY, which is a group with no members. The predefined constant MPI-GROUP-NULL is the value used for invalid group handles. Advice to users. MPI-GROUP-EMPTY, which is a valid handle to an empty group, should not be confused with MPI-GROUP-NULL, which in turn is an invalid handle. The former may be used as an argument to group operations; the latter, which is returned when a group is freed, in not a valid argument. (End of advice to users.) , Advice to implementors. A group may be represented by a virtual-to-real process-address-translation table. Each communicator object (see below) would have a pointer to such a table.

, Simple implementations of MPI will enumerate groups, such as in a table. However, more advanced data structures make sense in order to improve scalability and memory usage with large numbers of processes. Such implementations are possible with MPI. (End of advice to implementors.)

5.2.2 CONTEXTS

A context is a property of communicators (defined next) that allows partitioning of the communication space. A message sent in one context cannot be received in another context. Furthermore, where permitted, collective operations are independent of pending point-to-point operations. Contexts are not explicit MPI objects; they appear only as part of the realization of communicators (below).

Advice to implementors. Distinct communicators in the same process have distinct contexts. A context is essentially a system-managed tag (or tags) needed to make a communicator safe for point-to-point and MPI-defined collective communication. Safety means that collective and point-to-point communications within one communicator do not interfere, and that com munications over distinct communicators don’t interfere. A possible implementation for a context is as a supplemental tag at tached to messages on send and matched on receive. Each intra-communi cator stores the value of its two tags (one for point-to-point and one for collective communication). Communicator-generating functions use a col lective communication to agree on a new group-wide unique context.

Analogously, in inter-communication (which is strictly point-to-point communication), two context tags are stored per communicator, one used by group A to send and group B to receive, and a second used by group B to send and for group A to receive.

’

## Since contexts are not explicit objects, other implementations are also possible. (End of advice to implementors.)

5.2.3 INTRA-COMMUNICATORS Intra-communicators bring together the concepts of group and context. To support implementation-specific optimizations, and application topologies (de fined in the next chapter, chapter 6), communicators may also &dquo;cache&dquo; additional information (see Section 5.7). MPI communication operations reference com municators to determine the scope and the &dquo;communication universe&dquo; in which a point-to-point or collective operation is to operate. Each communicator contains a group of valid participants; this group always includes the local process. The source and destination of a message is identified by process rank within that group. For collective communication, the intra-communicator specifies the set of processes that participate in the collective operation (and their order, when significant). Thus, the communicator restricts the &dquo;spatial&dquo; scope of communi cation, and provides machine-independent process addressing through ranks.

a

Intra-communicators are represented by opaque intra-communicator ob jects, and hence cannot be directly transferred from one process to another.

5.2.4 PREDEFINED INTRA-COMMUNICATORS 
An initial intra-communicator MP1_COMM_WORLD of all processes the local pro 
cess can communicate with after initialization (itself included) is defined once 
MPI_IN1T has been called. In addition, the communicator MPI_COMM_S~ELF is 
provided, which includes only the process itself. 
The predefined constant MPI_COMM_IVULL is the value used for invalid com 
municator handles. 

In a static-process-model implementation of MPI, all processes that partic ipate in the computation are available after MPI is initialized. For this case, MPI_COMM_WORLD is a communicator of all processes available for the compu tation ; this communicator has the same value in all processes. In an imple mentation of MPI where processes can dynamically join an MPI execution, it may be the case that a process starts an MPI computation without having access to all other processes. In such situations, MPI-COMM-WORLD is a communica tor incorporating all processes with which the joining process can immediately communicate. Therefore, MPLCOMM-WORLD may simultaneously have different values in different processes. All MPI implementations are required to provide the MPI_COMM_WORLD communicator. It cannot be deallocated during the life of a process. The group corresponding to this communicator does not appear as a predefined constant, but it may be accessed using MPI-COMM_GROUP (see below). MPI does not specify the correspondence between the process rank in MPI-COMM-WORLD and its (machine-dependent) absolute address. Neither does MPI specify the func

tion of the host process, if any. Other implementation-dependent, predefined 
communicators may also be provided. 
5.3 Group Management 
This section describes the manipulation of process groups in MPI. These oper 
ations are local and their execution does not require interprocess communica 
tion. 
5.3.1 GROUP ACCESSORS 

M PI-G ROU P-SIZE (group, size) IN group group (handle) OUT size number of processes in the group (integer)

int MPI-Group-size(MPI-Group group, int *size)

MPI_GROUP_SIZE(GROUP, SIZE, IERROR) INTEGER GROUP, SIZE, IERROR

MPLGROUP-RANK(group, rank) 1N group group (handle) OUT rank rank of the calling process in group, or MPI-UNDEFINED if the process is not a member

(in teger)

int MPLGroup1ank eMPI _Group group, int *rank) MPI_GROUP_RANK(GROUP, RANK, IERROR) INTEGER GROUP, RANK, IERROR

##### MPI_GROUP_TRANSLATE_RANKS (groupl, n, ranksl, group2, ranks2)

IN groupl groupl (handle) T1W n number of ranks in ranksl and ranks2 arrays

(integer) 
IN ranks1 I array of zero or more valid ranks in groupl 
IN group2 group2 (handle) 
OUT ranks2 array of corresponding ranks in group2, MPI 
UNDEFINED when no correspondence exists. 
int MPI_Group_translate_ranks (MPI-Group groupl, int n, int *ranksl, 
MPI-Group group2, int *ranks2) 
MPI-GRDUP-TRANSLATE -RANKS ( GRDUP I , N, RANKS1, GROUP2, RANKS2, IERROR) 
INTEGER GROUP1, N, RANKS1(*), GROUP2, RANKS2(*), IERROR 
This function is important for determining the relative numbering of the 
same processes in two different groups. For instance, if one knows the ranks of 
certain processes in the group of MPI_COMM_WORLD, one might want to know 
their ranks in a subset of that group. 
MPI-GROUP-COMPARE(groupl, group2, result) 
TN g ro u p I first group (handle) 
IN group2 second group (handle) 
OUT result result (integer) 
int MPI_Group_compare(MPI_Group groupl,MPI_Group group2, int *result) 
MPI_GROUP_CDMPARE(GROUP1, GROUP2, RESULT, IERROR) 
INTEGER GROUP1, GROUP2, RESULT, IERROR 

MPUDENT results if the group members and group order is exactly the same in both groups. This happens for instance if groupl and group2 are the same handle. MPI_S1MILAR results if the group members are the same but the order is different. MPI_UNEQUAL results otherwise.

5.3.2 GROUP CONSTRUCTORS

’

Group constructors are used to subset and superset existing groups. These constructors construct new groups from existing groups. These are local op erations, and distinct groups may be defined on different processes; a process may also define a group that does not include itself. Consistent definitions are required when groups are used as arguments in communicator-building func tions. MPI does not provide a mechanism to build a group from scratch, but only from other, previously defined groups. The base group, upon which all other groups are defined, is the group associated with the initial communicator

##### MPI_COMM_WORLD (accessible through the function MPI_COMM_GROUP).

Rationale. In what follows, there is no group duplication function analo gous to MPI_COMM_DUP, defined later in this chapter. There is no need for a group duplicator. A group, once created, can have several references to it by making copies of the handle. The following constructors address the need for subsets and supersets of existing groups. (send of rationale.)

Advice to implementors. Each group constructor behaves as if it returned a new group object. When this new group is a copy of an existing group, then one can avoid creating such new objects, using a reference-count mechanism. (End of advice to im~le~ner~to~-s.)

##### MP1_COMM_GROUP(comm, group)

IN comm communicator (handle) OUT group group corresponding to comm (handle)

int MPI-Con)m-group(MPI-Comm comm, MPI_Group *group)

MPI_COMM_GROUP(COMM, GROUP, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, GROUP, IERROR MPI_COMM_GROUP returns in group a handle to the group of comm.

##### MPI-GROUP-UNION(groupl, group2, newgroup)

IN group I first group (handle) IN group2 second group (handle) OUT newgroup union group (handle)

int MPI_Group_union(MPI_Group groupl, M~’I_Group group2, MPI-Group *newgroup)

MPI_GROUP_UNION(GROUP1, GROUP2, NEWGROUP, IERROR) INTEGER GROUPI, GROUP2, NEWGROUP, IERROR

#### MPI_GRQUP_INTERSECTIGN(group1, group2, newgroup)

IN groupl I first group (handle) IN group2 second group (handle) OUT newgroup intersection group (handle)

int MPI-Group-intersection(MPI-Group groupl, MPI-Group group2, 
MPI-Group *newgroup) 
MPI_GROUP_INTERSECTION(GROUP1, GROUP2, NEWGROEJP, IERROR) 
INTEGER GROUP1, GROUP2, NEWGROUP, IERROR 

##### MPI-GROUP-DIFFERENCE(groupl, group2, newgroup)

IN groupl I first group (handle) IN group2 second group (handle) OUT newgroup difference group (handle)

int MPI_Group_difference(MPI_Group group, MPI-Group group2, MPI-Group *newgroup)

MPI-GRDVP -D IFFERENCE (GROUP1, GROUP2, NEWGROUP, IERROR) 
INTEGER GROUP1, GROUP2, NEWGROUP, IERROR 
The set-like operations are defined as follows: 
union All elements of the first group (group1 ), followed by all elements of 
second group (group2) not in first. 
intersect All elements of the first group that are also in the second group, or 
dered as in first group. 
difference All elements of the first group that are not in the second group, 
ordered as in the first group. I 
Note that for these operations the order of processes in the output group is de 

termined primarily by order in the first group (if possible) and then, if necessary, by order in the second group. Neither union nor intersection are commutative, but both are associative. The new group can be empty, that is, equal to MPLGROUP _EMPTY.

#### MPLGROUP-INCL(group, n, ranks, newgroup)

’

1 group group (handle) 
IN n, number of elements in array ranks (and size of 
’ 

newgroup) (integer) lN ranks ranks of processes in group to appear in new

group (array of integers) OUT newgroup new group derived from above, in the order de

fined by ranks (handle)

fl

int MPI_Group_incl(MPI_Group group, int n, int *ranks, MPI-Group *newgroup) MPI_GROUP_INCL(GROUP, N, RANKS, NEWGROUP, IERROR) INTEGER GROUP, N, RANKS(*), NEWGROUP, IERROR The function MPLGROUP-INCL creates a group newgroup that consists of the n processes in group with ranks rank[0],..., rank[n-1]; the process with rank i in newgroup is the process with rank ranks[I] in group. Each of the n elements of ranks must be a valid rank in group and all elements must be distinct, or else the program is erroneous. If n = 0, then newgroup is MPI-GROUP-EMPTY. This function can, for instance, be used to reorder the elements of a group. See also MPI_GROUP_COMPARE.

#### MPI_GROUP_EXCL(group, n, ranks, newgroup)

IN group group (handle) 
IN n number of elements in array ranks (integer) 
IN ranks array of integer ranks in group not to appear in 
newgroup 
OUT newgroup new group derived from above, preserving the 

order defined by group (handle)

int MPI_Group_excl(MPI_Group group, int n, int *ranks, MPI-Group *newgroup) 
MPI_GROUP~XCL(GROUP, N, RANKS, NEWGROUP, IERROR) 
INTEGER GROUP, N, RANKS(*), NEWGROUP, IERROR 
The function MPI_GROUP_EXCL creates a group of processes newgroup 
that is obtained by deleting from group those processes with ranks ranks[0] ,... 

ranks[n-1]. The ordering of processes in newgroup is identical to the ordering in group. Each of the n elements of ranks must be a valid rank in group and all elements must be distinct; otherwise, the program is erroneous. If n = 0, then newgroup is identical to group.

##### MPLGROUP_RANGEJNCL(group, n, ranges, newgroup)

IN group group (handle) 
IN n number of triplets in array ranges (integer) 
IN ranges an array of integer triplets, of the form (first rank, 
last rank, stride) indicating ranks in group of pro 
cesses to be included in newgroup 
OUT newgroup new group derived from above, in the order de 

fined by ranges (handle)

int MPI-Group-range-incKMPI-Group group, int n, int ranges [] [3] ,

MPI-Group *newgroup)

XPI-GRDUP-RANGE-INCL(GRDUP, N, RANGES, NEWGROUP, IERROR) INTEGER GROUP, N, RANGES(3,*), NEWGROUP, IERROR

If ranges consist of the triplets ( f irst~ , ldst~ , stride..), ... , (first,, last,, stride,)

then newgroup consists of the sequence of processes in group with ranks

Each computed rank must be a valid rank in group and all computed ranks must be distinct, or else the program is erroneous. Note that we may have firsti > lasti, and stride¡ may be negative, but cannot be zero.

The functionality of this routine is specified to be equivalent to expanding the array of ranges to an array of the included ranks and passing the resulting array of ranks and other arguments to MPI_GROUP_INCL. A call to MPI_GROUP_ INCL is equivalent to a call to MPI-GROUP-RANGE-INCL with each rank i in ranks replaced by the triplet (i, i,1) in the argument ranges.

##### MPI_GROUP_RANGE_EXCL(group, n, ranges, newgroup)

y group group (handle) 
T1VT n number of elements in array ranks (integer) 
Df ra nges a one-dimensional array of integer triplets of the 
form (first rank, last rank, stride), indicating the 
ranks in group of processes to be excluded from 
the output group newgroup. 
OUT newgroup new group derived from above, preserving the 

order in group (handle)

int MPI-Group-range-excl (MPI-Group group, int n, int ranges [] [3] , 
MPI-Group *newgroup) 
MPI-GROUP-RANGE-EXCL (GROUP, N , RANGES , NEWGROUP, IERROR) 
INTEGER GROUP, N, RANGES(3,*), NEWGROUP, IERROR 

Each computed rank must be a valid rank in group and all computed ranks must be distinct, or else the program is erroneous.

The functionality of this routine is specified to be equivalent to expand ing the array of ranges to an array of the excluded ranks and passing the resulting array of ranks and other arguments to MPI_GROUP_EXCL. A call to ’ MPI_GROUP_EXCL is equivalent to a call to MPI_GROUP_RANGE_EXCL with each rank i in ranks replaced by the triplet (i,i,i) in the argument ranges.

Advice to users. The range operations do not explicitly enumerate ranks, and therefore are more scalable if implemented efficiently. Hence, we recommend MPI programmers to use them whenever possible, as high quality implementations will take advantage of this fact. (End of advice to uses.) Advice to i~n~lementars. The range operations should be implemented, if possible, without enumerating the group members, in order to obtain better scalability (time and space). (End of advice to 2m,~leme~rctors.)

5.3.3 GROUP DESTRUCTORS

##### MPI-GROUP-FREE(group)

INOUT group group (handle)

int MPI-Groupdree(MPI-Group *group)

.

MPI -GROUP -FREE (GROUP, IERROR) INTEGER GROUP , IERROR

This operation marks a group object for deallocation, The handle group is set to MPI-GROUP-NULL by the call. Any on-going operation using this group will

#### complete normally.

Advice to implementors. One can keep a reference count that is incre mented for each call to MPI_COMM_CREATE and MPI_COMM_DUP, and decremented for each call to MPI_GROUP_FREE or MPI_COMM_FREE; the group object is ultimately deallocated when the reference count drops to zero. (L’nd of advice to implementors.)

5.4 Communicator Management This section describes the manipulation of communicators in MPI. Operations that access communicators are local and their execution does not require inter process communication. Operations that create communicators are collective and may require interprocess communication. Advice to imPlenumtors. High-quality implementations should amortize the overheads associated with the creation of communicators (for the same group, or subsets thereof) over several calls, by allocating multiple contexts with one collective communication. (End of advice to irr~~lementors.)

5.4.1 COMMUNICATOR ACCESSORS

### The following are all local operations.

’

MPI_COMM_SIZEtcomm, size)

’

l~’ Comm communicator (handle) OUT size number of processes in the group of comm

(integer)

int MPI_Camm_size(lrfP3_Comm comm, int *size)

M~I_COMM_~IZE(COt~’I, SIZE, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, SIZE, IERROR

Rationale. This function is equivalent to accessing the communicator’s group with MPI_COMM_GROUP (see below), computing the size using MPI-GROUP-SIZE, and then freeing the group temporaryvia 1111P1_GROUP_ FREE. However, this function is so commonly used, that this shortcut was

### introduced. (End of -rationale.)

. Advice to users. This function indicates the number of processes involved in a communicator. For MPI_COMM_WORLD, it indicates the total number of processes available (for this version of MPI, there is no standard way to change the number of processes once initialization has taken place). This call is often used with the next call to determine the amount of concurrency available for a specific library or program. The following call, MPI_COMM_RANK indicates the rank of the process that calls it in the range from 0 ...size~ l, where size is the return value of MPI-COMM-SIZE.(End of advice to users.)

MPLCOMtvLRANK(comm, rank) IN comm communicator (handle) OUT rank rank of the calling process in group of comm .

(integer)

int MPI_Comm_rank(MPI_Comm comm, int *rank)

MPI-COMM-RANK(C0Mtl, RANK, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, RANK, IERROR

T ationale. This function is equivalent to accessing the communicator’s group with MPI_COMM_GROUP (see below), computing the size using MPLGROUP-RANK, and then freeing the group temporary via MPI GROUP_FREE. However, this function is so commonly used, that this short

cut was introduced. (End of rationale.) 
Advice to users. This function gives the rank of the process in the particular 
communicator’s group. It is useful, as noted above, in conjunction with 
MPI_COMM_SIZE. 

’

Many programs will be written with the master-slave model, where one process (such as the rank-zero process) will play a supervisory role, and the other processes will serve as compute nodes. In this framework, the two preceding calls are useful for determining the roles of the various processes of a communicator. (End of advice to users.)

MPI-COMM_COMPARE(comm1, comm2, result) T~1~T comm 1 first communicator (handle) IN Comm2 second communicator (handle) OUT result result (integer)

int MPI_Comm_compare(MPI_Comm comml,MPI_Comm comm2, int *result) 
MPI_GDMM_COMPARE(COMM1, COMM2, RESULT, IERROR) 
INTEGER COMM1, COMM2, RESULT, IERROR 

MPI_IDENT results if and only if comm1 and comm2 are handles for the same object (identical groups and same contexts). MPI_CONGRUENT results if the underlying groups are identical in constituents and rank order; these communi cators differ only by context. MPLSIMILAR results if the group members of both communicators are the same but the rank order differs. MPI_UNEQUAL results otherwise. 5.4.2 COMMUNICATOR CONSTRUCTORS The following are collective functions that are invoked by all processes in the group associated with comm. Rationale. Note that there is a chicken-and-egg aspect to MPI in that a communicator is needed to create a new communicator. The base com municator for all MPI communicators is predefined outside of MPI, and is MPI_COMM_WORLD. This model was arrived at after considerable debate, and was chosen to increase &dquo;safety&dquo; of programs written in MPI. (End of rationale.)

MPI_COMM_DUP(comm, newcomm) IN Comm communicator (handle) OUT newcomm copy of comm (handle)

int MPI_Comm_dup(MPI_Comm comm, MPI_Comm *newcomm)

XPI-COMM-DUP(C0Mtl, NEWCOMM, IERROR) 
INTEGER COMM, NEWCOMM, IERROR 
MPLCOM!B/LDUP Duplicates the existing communicator comm with associ 
ated key values. For each key value, the respective copy callback function deter- 

mines the attribute value associated with this key in the new communicator; one particular action that a copy callback may take is to delete the attribute from the new communicator. Returns in newcomm a new communicator with the same group, any copied cached information, but a new context (see Section 5.7.1).

Advice to users. This operation is used to provide a parallel library call with a duplicate communication space that has the same properties as the original communicator. This includes any attributes (see below), and topologies (see chapter 6). This call is valid even if there are pending point-to-point communications involving the communicator comm. A typical call might involve a MPI-COMM-DUP at the beginning of the parallel call, and an MPI_COMM_PREE of that duplicated cominunicator at the end of the call. Other models of communicator management are also possible. This call applies to both intra- and inter-communicators. (End or advice to users. ) Advice to implementors. One need not actually copy the group information, but only add a new reference and increment the reference count. Copy on write can be used for the cached information. (End of advice to implementors.)

MPI_COMM_CREATE(comm, group, newcomm)

IN Comm communicator (handle) T~T~ group Group, which is a subset of the group of comm

(handle) OUT riewCOmm new communicator (handle)

int MPI-ComnLcreate(MPI-Comni comm, MPI-Group group, MPI-Comm *newcomm) 
MPI.COMM-CREATE(COMM, GROUP, NEWCOMM, IERROR) 
INTEGER COMM, GROUP, NEWCOMM, IERROR 
This function creates a new communicator newcomm with communication 

group defined by group and a new context. No cached information propagates from comm to newcomm. The function returns MPI_COMM_EVULL to processes that are not in group. The call is erroneous if not all group arguments have the same value, or if group is not a subset of the group associated with comm. Note that the call is to be executed by all processes in comm., even if they do not belong to the new group. This call applies only to intra-communicators.

Rationale. The requirement that the entire group of comm participate in the call stems from the following considerations: w It allows the implementation to layer MPI_COMM_CREATE on top of regular collective communications.

### . It provides additional safety, in particular in the case where partially overlapping groups are used to create new communicators.

1

. It permits implementations sometimes to avoid communication re lated to context creation. (End of rationale.)

Advice to users. MPI_COMM_CREATE provides a means to subset a group of processes for the purpose of separate MIMD computation, with sepa rate communication space. newcomm, which emerges from MPI_COMM_ CREATE can be used in subsequent calls to MPI_COMM_CREATE (or other communicator constructors) further to subdivide a computation into par allel sub-computations. A more general service is provided by MPI_COMM_

##### SPLIT, below. (End of advice to users.)

Advice to iyrcplement.ors. Since all processes calling MPI-COMM-DUP or

MPI_COMM_CREATE provide the same group argument, it is theoretically possible to agree on a group-wide unique context with no communication. However, local execution of these functions requires use of a larger context name space and reduces error checking. Implementations may strike var ious compromises between these conflicting goals, such as bulk allocation of multiple contexts in one collective operation. Important: If new communicators are created without synchronizing the processes involved then the communication system should be able to cope with messages arriving in a context that has not yet been allocated at the receiving process. (En.d of advice to implementors.)

MPI-COMM-SPLIT(comm, color, key, newcomm) IN Comm communicator (handle)

’

IN color control of subset assignment (integer) IN key control of rank assigment (integer) OUT newcomm new communicator (handle)

int MPI -Comm-split (MPI -Comm comm, int color, int key, MPI-Comm *newcomm) 
MPI_CON4~’1_SPLIT(COI~I, COLOR, KEY, NEWCOMM, IERROR) 
INTEGER COMM, COLOR, KEY, NEWCOMM, IERROR 

This function partitions the group associated with comm into disjoint subgroups, one for each value of color. Each subgroup contains all processes of the same color. Within each subgroup, the processes are ranked in the order defined by the value of the argument key, with ties broken according to their rank in the old group. A new communicator is created for each subgroup and returned in newcomm. A process may supply the color value MPI_UNDEFINED, in which case newcomm returns MP1_COMM_NULL. This is a collective call, but each process is permitted to provide different values for color and key. A call to MPI-COMM_CREATE(comm, group, newcomm) is equivalent to a call to MPI_COMM_SPLIT(comm, color, key, newcomm), where all members of group provide color = 0 and key = rank in group, and all processes

that are not members of group provide color = MPI_UNDEFINED. The func tion MPI-COMM-SPLIT allows more general partitioning of a group into one or more subgroups with optional reordering. This call applies only to intra communicators.

Advice to users. This is an extremely powerful mechanism for dividing a single communicating group of processes into k subgroups, with k chosen implicitly by the user (by the number of colors asserted over all the pro cesses). Each resulting communicator will be non-overlapping. Such a division could be useful for defining a hierarchy of computations, such as for multigrid, or linear algebra. Multiple calls to MPI-COMM-SPLIT can be used to overcome the re quirement that any call have no overlap of the resulting communicators (each process is of only one color per call). In this way, multiple overlap ping communication structures can be created. Creative use of the color and key in such splitting operations is encouraged. Note that, for a fixed color, the keys need not be unique. It is MPI COMM-SPLIT’S responsibility to sort processes in ascending order accord ing to this key, and to break ties in a consistent way. If all the keys are specified in the same way, then all the processes in a given color will have the relative rank order as they did in their parent group. (In general, they will have different ranks.) Essentially, making the key value zero for all processes of a given color means that one doesn’t really care about the rank-order of the processes in the new communicator. (En.d of advice to users.)

5.4.3 COMMUNICATOR DESTRUCTORS

MPI-COMM-FREE(comm) INOUT Comm communicator to be destroyed (handle)

int MPI-Commdree(MPI-Comm *comm) MPI_COMM_FREE(COMM, IERROR) ’

INTEGER COMM, IERROR n

This collective operation marks the communication object for deallocation. The handle is set to MPI_COMM_NULL. Any pending operations that use this communicator will complete normally; the object is actually deallocated only if there are no other active references to it. This call applies to intra- and inter communicators. The delete callback functions for all cached attributes (see Section 5.7) are called in arbitrary order. Advice to implementors. A reference-count mechanism may be used: the reference count is incremented by each call to MPI_COMM_DUP, and decre

1

mented by each call to MPI_COMM_FREE. The object is ultimately deallo

cated when the count reaches zero.

Though collective, it is anticipated that this operation will normally be implemented to be local, though the debugging version of an MPI library might choose to synchronize. (send of advice to implementors.)

5.5 Motivating Examples

5.5.1 CURRENT PRACTICE #i

Example #I a:

main(int argc, char **argv) I

int me, size;

MPI_Init ( &argc, &argv ); 
MPI_Comm_rank (MPI-COMM-WORLD, &me); 
MPI_Comm_size (MPI_COMM_WORLD, &size); 

(void)printf (&dquo;Process %,d size °/,dBn&dquo;, me, size);

MPI_Finalize();

I

Example #la is a do-nothing program that initializes itself legally, and refers to the the &dquo;all&dquo; communicator, and prints a message. It terminates itself legally too. This example does not imply that MPI supports printf-like communication itself.

Example #1 b (supposing that size is even):

main(int argc, char **argv) {

int me, size;

int SOME_TAG = 0;

MPI-Init(&argc, &argv);

MPI-Comm-rank(MPI-COMM-WORLD, &me); /* local */ MPI_Comm_size(MPI_CDMM_WORLD, &size); /* local */

if ( (me % 2) == 0) 1

/* send unless highest-numbered process */ if ( (me + 1) < size) MPI_Send(..., me + 1, SOME_TAG, MPI_CDMM_WORLD);

1

329 else

MPI_Recv(..., me - 1, SOME_TAG, MPI_COMM_WORLD);

MP1_Finaliae();

)

Example #lb schematically illustrates message exchanges between &dquo;even&dquo; and &dquo;odd&dquo; processes in the &dquo;all&dquo; communicator.

5.5.2 CURRENT PRACTICE #2 main(int argc, char **argv) {

int me, count;

void *data;

. IF, i

MPI_Init, (&argc 8~argv) ; 
MPI_Comm_rank(MPI_COMM_WORLD, &me); 

if (me == 0) (

/* get input, create buffer &dquo;data&dquo; */

}

MPI_Bcast(data, count, MPI_BYTE, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD);

MPI_Finalize();

}

This example illustrates the use of a collective communication.

5.5.3 (APPROXIMATE) CURRENT PRACTICE #3

main(int argc, char **argv) {

int me, count, count2; 
void *send_buf, *recv_buf, *send_buf2, *recv_buf2; 
MPI_Group MPI_GROUP_WORLD, grprem; 
MPI_Comm commslave; 

static int ranks [] = {0)-;

MPI_Init(&argc, &argv);

t

MPI_Conun_group(MPI_COMM_WORLD, &MPI_GROUP_WORLD)j MPI_Comm_rank(MPI_COMM_WORLD, &me); /* local */

MPI_Group_excl, (MPI_GROUP_WORLD 1, ranks, &grprem); /* local */ MPIJ~omm_. create(MPI_CQMM_WORLD, grprem, 8tcommsiave);

if(me != 0) {

/* compute on slave */

MPI_Reduce(send_buf,recv_buff,count, MPI_INT, MPI_SUM, 1, commslave);

}

’

/* zero falls through immediately to this reduce, others do later... */ 
MPI Reduce(send_buf2, recv_buff2, count2, 
MPI_INT, MPI_SUM, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD); 
MPI_Comm_free(&commslave); 
MPI_Group_free(&MPI_GRDUP_MQRLD); 
MPI_Group_freef8cgrprem); 
MPI_Finalize(); 

}

This example illustrates how a group consisting of all but the zeroth process of the &dquo;all&dquo; group is created, and then how a communicator is formed ( eommslave) for that new group. The new communicator is used in a collective call, and all processes execute a collective call in the MPI_COMM_WORLD context. This exam ple illustrates how the two communicators (that inherently possess distinct con texts) protect communication. That is, communication in MPI_GOMM_WORLD is insulated from communication in commsiave, and vice versa.

In summary, &dquo;group safety&dquo; is achieved via communicators because distinct contexts within communicators are enforced to be unique on any process.

5.5.4 EXAMPLE #4 
The following example is meant to illustrate &dquo;safety&dquo; between point-to-point and 
collective communication. MPI guarantees that a single communicator can do 
safe point-to-point and collective communication. 

#define TAG_ARBITRARY 12345 #define SOME_COUNT 50 main(int argc, char **argv)

’ ’

{

int me;

MPI_Request request [2] ;

MPI_Status status [2] ; 
MPI_Group MPI_GROUP_WORLD, subgroup; 
int ranks[] = {2, 4, 6, 8]-; 
MPI-Comm the_comm; 
MPI_Init(&argc, &argv); 
MPI_Co~nm_group(MPI_CDMM_WDRLD, ~C~PPI~GRDUP_WDRLD) ; 

MPI_Group_incl(MPI_GRDUP_WORLD, 4, ranks, &subgroup); /* local */ MPI_Group_rank(subgroup, &me); /* local */

MPI_Comm_create, (MPI_CDMM_WDRLD subgroup, 8~the_comm);

if(me != MPI_UNDEFlNED) {

MPI-Irecv(buffl, count, MPI_DOUBLE, MPI_ANY_SOURCE, TAG_ARBITRARY,

the_comm, request); MPI_Isend(buff2, count, MPI-DOUBLE, (me+l)%4, TAG_ARBITRARY,

the_cvmm, request+1) ; i

1-

for(i = 0; i < 50ME_GOU1~T, i++) MPI_Reduce(..., the_comm); MPI-Waitall(2, request, status);

MPI_Comm_free(t&he_comm); 
MPI_Group_free(&MPI_GROUP_WORLD); 
MPI_Group_free(&subgroup); 
MPLFinalizeO; 

}

5.5.5 LIBRARY EXAMPLE #1 The main program:

main(int argc, char **argv) {

int done = 0;

user_lib_t *libh_a, *libh_b; 
void *datasetl, *dataset2; 

MPI-Init(&argc, &argv); ..fi 11

init-user-lib(MPI-COMM-WORLD, 8clibh_a); init-user-lib(MPI-COMM-WORLD, klibh_b);

...

user_start_ap(libh.&dquo;a, datasetl);

user_start_op(libh_b, dataset2);

while(!done) {

/* work */

MPI_Reduce(..., MPI_CDMM_WDRLD)¡ /* see if done */

=j

user_end_op(libh_a); 
user_end_op(libh_b); 
uninit_user_lib(libh_a); 
uninit_user_lib(libh_b); 

MPI_FinalizeO; i

) The user library initialization code:

void init_user_lib(MPI_Comm comm, user_lib_t **handle) (

user_lib_t *save;

user_lib_initsave(&save); /* local */ MPI_Comm_dup(comm, &(save -> comm));

/* other inits */ *handle = save;

~

User start-up code:

void usex.~start_op(user_lib_t *handle, void *data) (

MPI_Irecv( ..., handle->comm, &(handle -> a.recv_han.dle) ); 
MPI_Isend( ..., handle->comm, &(handle -> isend_handle) ); 

}

User communication clean-up code:

void user_end_op(user_lib_t *handle)

MPI_Status *status;

MPI_Wait(handle -> isend_handle, status); 
MPI_Wait(handle -> irecv_handle, status); 

}

User object clean-up code:

void uninit_user_lib(user_lib_t *handle) I

MPI_Conim~free(& (handle -> comm)); 
free(handle); 

}

5.5.6 LIBRARY EXAMPLE #2 The main program:

main(int argc, char **argv) {

int ma, mb; 
MPI_Group MPI-GROUP-WORLD, group_a, group_b; 

MPI_Comm comm_a, comm_b;

static int list_a[] = ~0, 1}; 
#if def ined(EXAMPLE_2B) I defined{EXAMPLE_2C) 
static int list_b[] = (0, 2 31; 
#else/* EXAMPLE_2A */ 
static int 7~ist_b[~ - {a, 2}; 

#endif f

int size_list_a = sizeof(list_a)/sizeof(int); 
int size_list_b = sizeof(list_b)/sizeof(int); 
MPI_Init(&argc, &argv); 
MPI_Comm_group(MPI_COMM_WORLD, &MPI_GRDUP_WORLD); 
MPI_Group_incl(MPI_GROUP_WDRLD, size_list_a, list_a, &group_a); 
MPI-Group-incl(MPI-GROUP-WORLD, size_list_b, list_b, &group_b); 
MPI-Comm-create(MPI-COMM-WORLD, group_a, &comm_a); 
MPI-Comm-create(MPI-COMM-WORLD, group_b, &comm_b); 
MPI_Comm_rank(comm_a, &ma); 
MPI_Comm_rank(comm_b, &mb); 

if(ma != MPI_UNDEFINED)

’

lib_call(comm_a);

if(mb != MPI-UNDEFINED) {

lib_call(cnmm_b3; 
lib_call(comm_b); 

)

MPI_Comm_free(&comm_a); 
MPI_Comm_free(&comm_b); 

’

MPI_Group_fzee(&group.~a); 
MPI_Group_free(&group_b); 
MPI-Group-free(&MPI-GROUP-WORLD); 
MPI_F’inalize() ; 

I

#### The library:

void 3ib_call(MPI_Comm comm) {

int me, done = 0;

MPI_Comm_rank(comm, &me); 
if (me == 0) , 
while(’done) 
{ 
MPI_Recv(..., MPI_ANY_SOt3RCE, MPI_ANY TAG, comm); 
410 i., .. 

j.

&dquo; ~

else {

/* work */

MPI_Send{..., 0, ARBITRARY_TAG, comm); 1

) ’ ’ ’ #ifdef EXAMPLE_2C /* include (resp, exclude) for safety (resp, no safety): */ MPI_Barrier(comm); ,

#endif }

The above example is really three examples, depending on whether or not one includes rank 3 in list-b, and whether or not a synchronize is included in lib_call. This example illustrates that, despite contexts, subsequent calls to !)b-ca!) l with the same context need not be safe from one another (colloquially, &dquo;back masking&dquo;). Safety is realized if the MPLBarrier is added. What this demonstrates

is that libraries have to be written carefully, even with contexts. When rank 3 is excluded, then the synchronize is not needed to get safety from back-masking. Algorithms like &dquo;reduce&dquo; and &dquo;allreduce&dquo; have strong enough source selectiv ity properties so that they are inherently okay (no back-masking), provided that MPI provides basic guarantees. So are multiple calls to a typical tree-broadcast algorithm with the same root or different roots (see [28]). Here we rely on two guarantees of MPI: pairwise ordering of messages between processes in the same context, and source selectivity-deleting either feature removes the guarantee that back-masking cannot be required. Algorithms that try to do non-deterministic broadcasts or other calls that include wildcard operations will not generally have the good properties of the deterministic implementations of &dquo;reduce,&dquo; &dquo;allreduce,&dquo; and &dquo;broadcast.&dquo; Such algorithms would have to utilize the monotonically increasing tags (within a communicator scope) to keep things straight. All of the foregoing is a supposition of &dquo;collective calls&dquo; implemented with point-to-point operations. MPI implementations may or may not implement collective calls using point-to-point operations. These algorithms are used to il lustrate the issues of correctness and safety, independent of how MPI implements its collective calls. See also Section 5.8.

5.6 Inter-Communication This section introduces the concept of inter-communication and describes the portions of MPI that support it. It describes support for writing programs that contain user-level servers. All point-to-point communication described thus far has involved commu nication between processes that are members of the same group. This type of communication is called &dquo;intra-communication&dquo; and the communicator used is called an &dquo;intra-communicator,&dquo; as we have noted earlier in the chapter. In modular and multi-disciplinary applications, different process groups ex ecute distinct modules and processes within different modules communicate with one another in a pipeline or a more general module graph. In these ap plications, the most natural way for a process to specify a target process is by the rank of the target process within the target group. In applications that con tain internal user-level servers, each server may be a process group that provides services to one or more clients, and each client may be a process group that uses the services of one or more servers. It is again most natural to specify the target process by rank within the target group in these applications. This type of communication is called &dquo;inter-communication&dquo; and the communicator used is called an &dquo;inter-communicator,&dquo; as introduced earlier. An inter-communication is a point-to-point communication between pro cesses in different groups. The group containing a process that initiates an inter-communication operation is called the &dquo;local group,&dquo; that is, the sender in a send and the receiver in a receive. The group containing the target process

is called the &dquo;remote group,&dquo; that is, the receiver in a send and the sender in a receive. As in intra-communication, the target process is specified using a (communicator, rank) pair. Unlike intra-communication, the rank is relative to

a second, remote group. 
All inter-communicator constructors are blocking and require that the local 
and remote groups be disjoint in order to avoid deadlock. 
Here is a summary of the properties of inter-communication and inter 
communicators : 
~ The syntax of point-to-point communication is the same for both inter- and 
intra-communication. The same communicator can be used both for send 

and for receive operations. ~ A target process is addressed by its rank in the remote group, both for sends and for receives. w Communications using an inter-communicator are guaranteed not to con flict with any communications that use a different communicator. w An inter-communicator cannot be used for collective communication. . A communicator will provide either intra- or inter-communication, never both. The routine MPI-COMM-TEST-INTER may be used to determine if a communi cator is an inter- or intra-commLCnicator. Inter-communicators can be used as arguments to some of the other communicator access routines. Inter-commun icators cannot be used as input to some of the constructor routines for intra communicators (for instance, MPI_COMM_CREATE). Advice to implementors.. For the purpose of point-to-point communication, communicators can be represented in each process by a tuple consisting of: group send_context receive-context

source For inter-communicators, group describes the remote group, and source is the rank of the process in the local group. For intra-communicators, group is the communicator group (remote=local), source is the rank of the process in this group, and send context and receive context are identical. A group is represented by a rank-to-absolute-address translation table. The inter-communicator cannot be discussed sensibly without consid ering processes in both the local and remote groups. Imagine a process P in group P, which has an inter-cozrzznunicator CP, and a process Q in group Q, which has an inter-communicator Cc~. Then . C~.group describes the group Q and Cc~.group describes the group P.

o C~.send_context = Cc~.receive_context and the context is unique in Q; 
C~.receive_context= CQ.send-context and this context is unique in P. 
. C~.source is rank of P in P and Cc~.source is rank of Q in Q. 
Assume that P sends a message to Q using the inter-communicator. 
Then P uses the group table to find the absolute address of Q; source and 
send-context are appended to the message. 
Assume that Q posts a receive with an explicit source argument using 
the inter-communicator. Then Q matches receive-context to the message 
context and source argument to the message source. 
The same algorithm is appropriate for intra-communicators as well. 
In order to support inter-communicator accessors and constructors, 
it is necessary to supplement this model with additional structures, that 
store information about the local communication group, and additional 

### safe contexts. (End of advice to im~dem.entors.}

5.6.1 INTER-COMMUNICATOR ACCESSORS

##### MPI-COMM-TEST-INTER(comm, flag) IN Comm communicator (handle) OUT flag (logical)

int MPI_Comm_test_inter(MPI_Comm comm, int *flag)

MP I -COMM -TEST-INTER (COMM, FLAG, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, IERROR LOGICAL FLAG

This local routine allows the calling process to determine if a communicator is an inter-communicator or an intra-communicator. It returns true if it is an inter-communicator, otherwise false. When an inter-communicator is used as an input argument to the communi cator accessors described above under intra-communication, the following table describes behavior.

Furthermore, the operation MPI_COMM_COMPARE is valid for inter-communi cators. Both communicators must be either intra- or inter-communicators, or else MP1_UNEQUAI_ results. Both corresponding local and remote groups must compare correctly to get the results MPI_COIVGRUENT and MPLStMtLAR. In par

I

ticular, it is possible for MPI_SIMILAR to result because either the local or remote groups were similar but not identical. The following accessors provide consistent access to the remote group of an inter-communicator:

### The following are all local operations. MPl_COMM_REMOTE_SIZE(comm, size)

IN Comm inter-communicator (handle) OUT size number of processes in the remote group of

comm (integer)

int MPI_Comm_remote_size(MPI_Comm comm, int *size)

MPI_COMM~i.EMOTE_SIZE(COMM, SIZE, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, SIZE, IERROR

#### MPI_COMM_REMOTE_GROUP(comm, group)

IN Comm inter-communicator (handle) OUT group remote group corresponding to comm (handle)

int MPI_Comm_remote_group(MPI_Comm comm, MPI-Group *group) MPI -COMM -REMOTE-GROUP (COMM, GROUP, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, GROUP, IERROR

Rationale. Symmetric access to both the local and remote groups of an inter-communicator is important, so this function, as well as MPLCOMM

### REMOTE_SIZE have been provided. (end of rationale.)

5.6.2 INTER-COMMUNICATOR OPERATIONS

This section introduces four blocking inter-communicator operations. MPI INTERCOMM_CREATE is used to bind two intra-communicators into an inter communicator ; the function MPI-INTERCOMM -MERGE creates an intra-com municator by merging the local and remote groups of an inter-communicator.

The functions MPI-COMM-DUP and MPI_COMM_FREE, introduced previously, duplicate and free an inter-communicator, respectively. Overlap of local and remote groups that are bound into an inter-communi cator is prohibited. If there is overlap, then the program is erroneous and is likely to deadlock. (If a process is multi-threaded, and MPI calls block only a thread, rather than a process, then &dquo;dual membership&dquo; can be supported. It is then the user’s responsibility to make sure that calls on behalf of the two &dquo;roles&dquo;

of a process are executed by two independent threads.) The function MPI-INTERCOMM-CREATE can be used to create an inter-

communicator from two existing intra-communicators, in the following situa tion : At least one selected member from each group (the &dquo;group leader&dquo;) has the ability to communicate with the selected member from the other group; that is, a &dquo;peer&dquo; communicator exists to which both leaders belong, and each leader knows the rank of the other leader in this peer communicator (the two leaders could be the same process). Furthermore, members of each group know the rank of their leader. Construction of an inter-communicator from two intra-communicators re quires separate collective operations in the local group and in the remote group, as well as a point-to-point communication between a process in the local group and a process in the remote group. In standard MPI implementations (with static process allocation at initializa tion), the MPI-COMM-WORLD communicator (or preferably a dedicated duplicate thereof) can be this peer communicator. In dynamic MPI implementations, where, for example, a process may spawn new child processes during an MPl exe cution, the parent process may be the &dquo;bridge&dquo; between the old communication universe and the new communication world that includes the parent and its children.

The application topology functions described in chapter 6 do not apply to inter-communicators. Users that require this capability should utilize MPI INTERCOMMaMERGE to build an intra-communicator, then apply the graph or cartesian topology capabilities to that intra-communicator, creating an appropriate topology-oriented intra-communicator. Alternatively, it may be reasonable to devise one’s own application topology mechanisms for this case, without loss

### of generality.

MPI-INTERCOMM-CREATE(local-comm, local-leader, peer-comm, remote_leader, tag, newintercomm)

~ lOCal_comm local intra-communicator (handle) IN local-leader rank of local group leader in local-comm

( in teger) IN peer_comm &dquo;peer&dquo;intra-communicatar;significantonl~atthe Iocal_leader (handle) Jl4’ remote_leader rank of remote group leader in peer_comm; sig nificant only at the IoGal_leader (integer) IN tag &dquo;safe&dquo; tag (integer) OUT newintercomm new inter-communicator (handle)

int MPI-Intercomm-create (MPI -Comm local-comm, int local-leader, 3~ItPI_Comm peer-comm, int rez~ote_leader, int tag, MPI_Cotnm *newintercomm)

I

MPI_INTERCOMM_CREATE(LOCAL_COMM, LOCAL-LEADER, PEER-COMM, REMOTE-LEADER, TAG, NEWINTERCOMM, IERROR) INTEGER LOCAL-COMM, LOCAL-LEADER, PEER-COMM, REMOTE-LEADER, TAG, NEWINTERCOMM, IERROR This call creates an inter-communicator. It is collective over the union of the local and remote groups. Processes should provide identical local_eomm and loeal_leader arguments within each group. Wildcards are not permitted for remote_leader, local-leader, and tag. This call uses point-to-point communication with communicator peer comm, and with tag tag between the leaders. Thus, care must be taken that there be no pending communication on peer-comm that could interfere with this communication.

Advice to users. We recommend using a dedicated peer communicator, such as a duplicate of MPI_COMM_WORLD, to avoid trouble with peer communicators. (End of advice to users.)

MPUNTERCO)v)tvLMERGE(intercomm, high, newintracomm) IN intercomm Inter-Communicator (handle) IN high (logical) OUT newintracomm new intra-communicator (handle)

int MPI -Inter comm-merge (MPI -Comm intercomm, int high, MPI-Comm *newintracomm) 
MPI-INTERCOMM-MERGE(INTERCOMM, HIGH, INTRACOMM, IERROR) 
INTEGER INTERCOMM, INTRACOMM, IERROR 
LOGICAL HIGH 

This function creates an intra-communicator from the union of the two groups that are associated with intercomm. All processes should provide the same high value within each of the two groups. If processes in one group provided the value high = false and processes in the other group provided the value high = true then the union orders the &dquo;low&dquo; group before the &dquo;high&dquo; group. If all processes provided the same high argument then the order of the union is arbitrary. This call is blocking and collective within the union of the two groups.

Advice to im~lemenlors. The implementation of MPI-INTERCOMM-MERGE,

MPI_COMM_FREE and MPI_COMM_DUP are similar to the implementation of MPI_INTERCOMM_CREATE, except that contexts private to the input inter-communicator are used for communication between group leaders rather than contexts inside a bridge communicator. (End of advice to imple mentors. )

5.6.3 INTER-COMMUNICATION EXAMPLES

Example 1: Three-Group &dquo;Pipeline&dquo; 
Groups 0 and 1 communicate. Groups 1 and 2 communicate. Therefore, group 
0 requires one inter-communicator, group 1 requires two inter-communicators, 
and group 2 requires 1 inter-communicator. 

main(int argc, char **argv) {

MPI_Comm myComm; /* intra-communicator of local sub-group */ MPI-Comm myFirstComm; /* inter-communicator */

MPI_Comm mySecondComm; /* second inter-communicator (group 1 only) */

int membershipKey; 
int rank; 
MPI_Init(&argc, &argv); 
MPI_Comm_xank(MPT_C(3Mi~_WORLD, &rank); 

/* User code must generate membershipKey in the range [0, 1, 21 *1 membershipKey = rank % 3;

/* Build intra-communicator for local sub-group */ MPI_Conmi_split(MPI~CDMM_WORLD, membershipKey, rank, &myComm);

/* Build inter-communicators. Tags are hard-coded. */

if (membershipKey == 0)

1 /* Group 0 communicates with group 1. */

MPI_Intercomm_create( myComm, 0, MPI_CDMM_WDRLD, 1, 1, &myFirstComm);

}

else if (membershipKey ==1) ( /* Group 1 communicates with groups 0 and 2. */

MPI_Intercomm_create( myComm, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD, 0,

1, 8~my’FirstCamm) ; MPI_Intercomm_create( myComm, 0, MPI-COMM-WORLD, 2,

12, &mySecondComm);

)

Fig. 5.1 Three-group pipeline.

I

Fig. 5.2 Three-group ring.

else if (membershipKey == 2)

’

{ /* Group 2 communicates with group 1. */

MPI_Intercomm_create( myComm, 0, MPI-COMM-WORLD, 1, 12, &myFirstComm);

}

/* Do work ... */

sWitch(membershipKey) /* free communicators appropriately */ {

case 1:

MPI_Comm_free(&mySecondComm); case 0: case 2:

MPI_Comm_free(&myFirstComm);

’

break;

)

MPI_Finalize();

}

##### Example 2: Three-Group &dquo;Ring&dquo;

Groups 0 and 1 communicate. Groups I and 2 communicate. Groups 0 and 2 communicate. Therefore, each requires two inter-communicators.

main(int argc, char **argv) {

MPI_Comm myComm; /* intra-communicator of local sub-group */ MPI_Comm myFirstComm; /* inter-communicators */

’ ’

MPI_Comm mySecondComm;

MPI_Status status;

.

int membershipKey; 
int rank; 

MPI_Init(8~argc, &argv); 
MPI_Comm_rank(MPI_COMM_WORLD, 8crank); 

. , . _ /* User code must generate membershipKey in the range [0, 1, 2] */ membershipKey = rank % 3;

/* Build intra-communicator for local sub-group */

MPI_Comm_split(MPI_COMM_WORLD, membershipKey, rank, &myComm);

. /* Build inter-communicators. Tags are hard-coded. */

if (membershipKey == 0)

{ /* Group 0 communicates with groups 1 and 2. */ MPI_Intercomm_create( myComm, 0, MPI-COMM-WORLD, 1,

1, &myFirstComm); MPI_Intercomm_createC myComm, 0, MPI-COMM-WORLD, 2,

2, BcmySecondComm) ;

)

else if (membershipKey ==1)

{ /* Group 1 communicates with groups 0 and 2. */

MPI_Intercomm_create( myComm, 0, MPI_CDMM_WORLD, 0, 1, &myFirstComm);

MPI_Intercomm_create( myComm, 0, MPI-COMM_WORLD, 2,

12, &mySecondComm);

)

else if (membershipKey == 2)

{ /* Group 2 communicates with groups 0 and 1. */

MPI_Intercomm_create( myComm, 0, MPI_COMM_WDRLD, 0,

2, &myFirstComm); MPI_Intercomm_create( myComm, 0, MPI_COMM_WORLD, 1, 12, &mySecondComm); ,

)

/* Do some work ... */ .

/* Then free communicators before terminating... */ 
MPI_Comm_free(&myFirstComm); 
MPI_Comm_free(&mySecondComm); 
MPI_Comm_free(&myComm); 
MPI_Finalize(); 

-

t

’

Example 3: Building Name Service for Inter-communication

The following procedures exemplify the process by which a user could create name service for building inter-communicators via a rendezvous involving a server communicator, and a tag name selected by both groups.

After all MPI processes execute MPLlNIT, every process calls the example function, Init_server(), defined below. Then, if the new-world returned is NULL, the process getting NULL is required to implement a server function, in a re active loop, Qo_server(). Everyone else just does their prescribed computation, using new-world as the new effective &dquo;global&dquo; communicator. One designated process calls Undo_Server(~ to get rid of the server when it is not needed any

longer. Features of this approach include:

. Support for multiple name servers . Ability to scope the name servers to specific processes . Ability to make such servers come and go as desired.

#define INIT_SERVER_TAG_1 666 #define UNDO-SERVER-TAG-1 777 static int server_key_val;

/* for attribute management for server_comm, copy callback: */ void handle_copy_fn(MPI_Comm *oldcomm, int *keyval, void *extra_state, void *attribute_val_in, void **attribute_val_out, int *flag) {

/* copy the handle */ *attribute_val_out = attribute_val_in; *flag = 1; /* indicate that copy to happen */

}

int Init_server(peer_comm, rank-of-server, server_comm, new_world)

MPI_Comm peer_comm;

int rank_of_server;

MPI_Comm *server_comm; 
MPI_Comm *new_world; /* new effective world, sans server */ 
{ 
MPI_Comm temp_comm, lone_comm; 
MPI_Group peer_group, temp_group; 
int rank_in_peer_comm, size, color, key = 0; 
int peer_leader, peer-leader-rank-in-temp-comm; 
MPI_Comm_rank(peer_comm, &rank_in_peer_comm); 
MPI-Comm-size(peer-comm, &size); 

if ((size < 2) II I (0 > rank_of_server) II I (rank_of_server >= size)) return (MPI_ERR_OTHER);

/* create two communicators, by splitting peer_comm into the server process, and everyone else */

peer_leader = (rank_of_server + 1) °/, size; /* arbitrary choice */ if ((color = (rank_in_peer_comm == rank_of_server)))

{

MPI_Comm_split(peer_comm, color, key, &lone_comm);

MPI_Intercomm_create(lone_comm, 0, peer_comm, peer_leader, INIT_SERVER_TAG_1, server_comm);

MPI_Con)m_free(&lone_comm) ; 
*new_world = (MPI_Comm) 0; 

}

else

{

MPI_Comm_Split(peer_comm, color, key, &temp_comm);

MPI_Comm_group(peer_comm, &peer_group); MPI_Comm_group(temp_comm, &temp_group); MPI_Group_translate_ranks(peer_group, 1, &peer_leader, temp_group, &peer_leader_rank_in_temp_comm);

MPI-Intercomm-create(temp-comm, peer_leader_rank_in_temp_comm, peer_comm, rank_of_server, INIT_SERVER_TAG_1, server_comm);

/* attach new_world communication attribute to server_eomm: */ /* CRITICAL SECTION FOR MULTITHREADING */ if(server_keyval == MPI_KEYVAL_INVALID) I

/* acquire the process-local name for the server keyval */ MPI_Attr_keyval_create(handle_copy_fn, NULL, 8cserver_keyval, NULL);

}

*new_world = temp_comm;

/* Cache handle of intra-communicator on inter-communicator: */

MPI_Attr_put(server_comm, server keyval, (void *)(*new_world));

I

return (MPI_SUCCESS);

~.

The actual server process would commit to running the following code:

int Do_server(server_comm)

MPI_Comm server-comm; {

void init_queue();

int en_queue(), de_queue(); /* keep triplets of integers for later matching (fns not shown) */

MPI_Comm comm; 
MPI_Status status; 
int client_tag, client_source; 
int client_rank_in_new_world, pairs_rank-in_new_world; 
int buffer [10] , count = 1; 

void *queue;

init_queue(&queue);

for (;;) {

MPI_Recv(buffer, count, MPI_INT, MPI_ANY_SOURCE, MPI_ANY_TAG, server_comm, &status); /* accept from any client */

/* determine client: */

client_tag = status.MPI_TAG; 
client_source = status.MPI_SOURCE; 
client_rank_in_new_world = buffer[0]; 

if (client_tag == UNDO-SERVER-TAG-1) /* client that terminates server */

~

while (de_queue(queue, MPI_ANY_TAG, &pairs-rank-in-new-world, &pairs_rank_in_server))

j

l~Z_Intercomm_free(~tserver_comm) ; break;

}

if (de_queue(queue, client_tag, &pairs_rank_in_new_world, 8cpairs_rank_in_server))

{

/* matched pair with same tag, tell them

about each other! */ buffer[0] =

pairs_rank_in_new_world; MPI_Send(buffer, 1, MPI_INT, client_src, client_tag, server_comm);

buffer [0] = client_rank_in_new_world; 
MPI_Send(buffer, 1, MPI_INT, pairs_rank_in_server, client_tag, 
server_comm); 

}

else

en_queue(queue, client_tag, client_source, client_rank_in_new_world);

)

}

A particular process would be responsible for ending the server when it is no longer needed. Its call to Undo-server would terminate server function.

int Undo_server(server_comm) /* example client that ends server */

MPI_Comm *server_comm; {

int buffer = 0;

MPI_Send(&buffer, 1, MPI_INT, 0, UNDO_SERVER-TAG-1, *server_comm); 
MPI_Tntercomm_free(server_comm); 

}

The following is a blocking name-service for inter-communication, with the same semantic restrictions as MPI_Intercomm_create, but simplified syntax. It uses the functionality just defined to create the name-service.

int Intercomm-name-create(local-comm, server_comm, tag, comm) 
MPI_Comm local_comm, server_comm; 
int tag; 

MPI_Comm *comm; (

int error;

int found; /* attribute acquisition mgmt for new_world */ /* comm in server_comm */

void *val;

MPI_Comm new_world;

int huf f er [ 10] , rank; 
int local_leader = 0; 

MPI_Attr_get(server_comm, server_keyval, &val, &found); new_world = (MPI_Comm)val; /* retrieve cached handle */

MPI-Comm-rank(server-comm, &rank); /* rank in local group *1

if (rank == local_leader) {

buf f er [0] = rank; 
MPI_Send(8cbuffer, 1, MPI~INT, 0, tag, server_comm); 
MPI_RecvC&buffer, 1, MPI_INT, 0, tag, server_comm); 

}

error = MPI-Intercomm-create(local-leader, local_comm, buffer[0] , new-world, tag, comm);

return(error);

}

#### 5.7 Caching

MPI provides a &dquo;caching&dquo; facility that allows an application to attach arbitrary pieces of information, called attributes, to communicators. More precisely, the caching facility allows a portable library to do the following:

w pass information between calls by associating it with an MPI intra- or inter

communicator, w quickly retrieve that information, and w be guaranteed that out-of-date information is never retrieved, even if the communicator is freed and its handle subsequently reused by MPI.

The caching capabilities, in some form, are required by built-in MPI rou tines such as collective communication and application topology. Defining an interface to these capabilities as part of the MPI standard is valuable because it permits routines like collective communication and application topologies to be implemented as portable code, and also because it makes MPI more extensible by allowing user-written routines to use standard MPI calling sequences. Advice to users. The communicator MPI-COMM-SELF is a suitable choice for posting process-local attributes, via this attributing-caching mechanism.

##### (End of advice to users.)

5.7.1 FUNCTIONALITY Attributes are attached to communicators. Attributes are local to the process and specific to the communicator to which they are attached. Attributes are not propagated by MPI from one communicator to another except when the com municator is duplicated using MPI_COMM_DUP (and even then the application must give specific permission through callback functions for the attribute to be

copied). 
Advice to implementors. Attributes are scalar values, equal in size to, or larger 
than a C-Ianguage pointer. Attributes can always hold an MPI handle. (End 
of advice to im~lementors. ) 
The caching interface defined here represents that attributes be stored by 
MPI opaquely within a communicator. Accessor functions include the following: 

. obtain a key value (used to identify an attribute); the user specifies &dquo;call back&dquo; functions by which MPI informs the application when the communi

cator is destroyed or copied. 9 store and retrieve the value of an attribute.

Advice to implementors. Caching and callback functions are only called synchronously, in response to explicit application requests. This avoids problems that result from repeated crossings between user and system space. (This synchronous calling rule is a general property of MPI.) The choice of key values is under control of MPI. This allows MPI to optimize its implementation ofattribute sets. It also avoids conflict between independent modules caching information on the same communicators. A much smaller interface, consisting of just a callback facility, would allow the entire caching facility to be implemented by portable code. How ever, with the minimal callback interface, some form of table searching is implied by the need to handle arbitrary communicators. In contrast, the more complete interface defined here permits rapid access to attributes through the use of pointers in communicators (to find the attribute table) and cleverly chosen key values (to retrieve individual attributes). In light of

the efficiency &dquo;hit&dquo; inherent in the minimal interface, the more complete interface defined here is seen to be superior. (End of advice to i~nplementors.) MPI provides the following services related to caching. They are all process local.

| | fli | | copy_fn | Copy callback function for keyval | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | IN | | delete_fn | Delete callback function for keyval | |
| | OUT | | keyval I | key value for future access (integer) | |
| | IN | | extra-state | Extra state for callback functions | |

MPI-KEYVAL-CREATE(copy-fn, delete_fn, keyval, extra-state)

int MPI-Keyval-create(MPI-Copy-f unction *copy_fn, MPLDelete-function 
*delete-fn, int *keyval, void* extra_state) 
MPI~CEY11AL_CREATE(COPY_FN, DELETE-FN, KEYVAL, EXTRA_STATE, IERROR) 
EXTERNAL CflFY~’N, DELETE-FN 
INTEGER KEYVAL, EXTRA-STATE, IERROR 
Generates a new attribute key. Keys are locally unique in a process, and 

### opaque to user, though they are explicitly stored in integers. Once allocated, the key value can be used to associate attributes and access them on any locally defined communicator.

The copyjn function is invoked when a communicator is duplicated by 
MPI_COMM_DUP. copy_fn should be of type MPI_Capy_function, which is defined 
as follows: . 
typedef int MPI_Copy_function(MPI_Comm *oldcomm, int *keyval, 
void *extra_state, void *attribute_val_in, 
void **attribute_val_out, int *flag) 
A Fortran declaration for such a function is as follows: 
FUNCTION CDPY..FUNCTIDN(CJLDCCIMM, KEYVAL, EXTRA-STATE, ATTRIBUTE-VAL-IN 
ATTRIBUTE-VAL .OUT, FLAG) 
INTEGER OLDCOMM, KEYVAL, EXTRA_STATE, ATTRIBUTE-VAL-IN, ATTRIBUTE_VAL_DU’f 
LOGICAL FLAG 

The copy callback function is invoked for each key value in oldcomm in arbitrary order. Each call to the copy callback is made with a key value and its corresponding attribute. If it returns flag = 0, then the attribute is deleted in the duplicated communicator. Otherwise (flag = 1), the new attribute value is set via attribute_val_out. The function returns MPLSUCCESS on success and an error code on failure (in which case M P I _CO M M _D U P will fail). copy-fn may be specified as MPI_NULL_FN from either C or FORTRAN, in which case no copy callback occurs for keyval; MPI_NULL_FN is a function that does nothing other than returning flag = 0. In C, the NULL function pointer has the same behavior as using MPI_NULL_FN, As a further convenience, MPI_DUP_FN is a simple-minded copy callback available from C and FORTRAN; it sets flag = 1, and returns the value of aaribute-val-in in attribute-val-out. Note that the C version of this MPI_COMM_DUP assumes that the callback functions follow the C prototype, while the corresponding FORTRAN version assumes the FORTRAN prototype.

Advice to users. A valid copy function is one that completely duplicates the information by making a full duplicate copy of the data structures implied by an attribute; another might just make another reference to that data structure, while using a reference-count mechanism. Other types of attributes might not copy at all (they might be specific to oldcomm only). (Lnd of advice to users.)

Analogous to copy-fn is a callback deletion function, defined as follows. The delete_fn function is invoked when a communicator is deleted by MPI_COMM_ FREE or when a call is made explicitly to MPLATTR_DELETE. delete_fn should be of type MPI_Delete_function, which is defined as follows:

typedef int MPI_Delete_function(MPI_Comm *comm, int *keyval, 
void *attribute_val, void *extra_state); 
A Fortran declaration for such a function is as follows: 
FUNCTION DELETEJFUNCTION(COMM, KEYVAL, ATTRIBUTE-VAL, EXTRA-STATE) 
INTEGER COMM, KEYVAL, ATTRIBUTE-VAL, EXTRA-STATE 

This function is called by MPI_GOMM_FREE and MPI-ATTR-DELETE to do whatever is needed to remove an attribute. It may be specified as the null function pointer in C or as MPI_NULL_FN from either C or FORTRAN, in which case no delete callback occurs for keyval. The special key value MPI-KEYVAL-INVALID is never returned by MPI_KEY’VAL_ CREATE. Therefore, it can be used for static initialization of key values.

MPI_KEY11AL_FREE(keyval~ 
INOUT keyva l Frees the integer key value (integer) 
int MPLKeyvaL.free (ínt *keyval) 
MPI~CEYVAL~’REE(KEYVAL, IERROR) 
INTEGER KEYVAL, IERROR 

Frees an extant attribute key. This function sets the value of keyval to M Pl-KEYVAL-INVALID. Note that it is not erroneous to free an attribute key that is in use, because the actual free does not transpire until after all references (in other communicators on the process) to the key have been freed. These references need to be explictly freed by the program, either via calls to MPI-ATTR-DELETE that free one attribute instance, or by calls to MPI-COMM-FREE that free all attribute instances associated with the freed communicator.

Advice to implementors. The function MPI-NULL-FN need not be aliased to (void (*))o in C, though this is fine. It could be a legitimately callable function that profiles and so on. For FORTRAN, it is most convenient to have MPI_NULL_FN be a legitimate do-nothing function call. (End of advice to implementors.)

’

MP1~4TTR_PUT(comm, keyval, attribute_val)

IN comm communicator to which attribute will be

attached (handle) ]N’ keyval l key value, as returned by MP!_KEYVAL_CREATE (integer) m attribute-vall l attribute value

int MPI-Attr_putCMPI_Comm comm, int keyval, void* attribute-val) 
MPT~1TTR~UT(COMM, KEYVAL, ATTRIBUTE_VAL, IERROR) 
INTEGER COMM, KEYVAL, ATTRIBUTE_VAL, IERROR 
This function stores the stipulated attribute value attribute_val for subse 
quent retrieval by MPI-ATTR-GET. If the value is already present, then the out 
come is as if MPI-ATTR-DELETE was first called to delete the previous value 
(and the callback function delete-fn was executed), and a new value was next 

### stored. The call is erroneous if there is no key with value keyval; in particular MPI-KEYVAL-INVALID is an erroneous key value.

##### MPI~TTR_GET(comm, keyval, attribute_val, flag)

IN COmm communicator to which attribute is attached

(handle) 
IN keyval l key value (integer) 
OUT attribute-val attribute value, unless flag = false 
OUT flag true if an attribute value was extracted; false if 

no attribute is associated with the key

int MP I -Attr-get (MPI -Comm comm, int keyval, void **attribute-val, int *flag) 
MPI-ATTR-GET (COMM, KEYVAL, ATTRIBUTE-VAL, FLAG, IERROR) 
INTEGER COMM, KEYVAL, ATTRIBUTE_VAL , IERROR 
LOGICAL FLAG 

Retrieves attribute value by key. The call is erroneous if there is no key with value keyval. On the other hand, the call is correct if the key value exists, but no attribute is attached on comm for that key; in such case, the call returns flag = false. In particular MPI_KEYVAL_INVALID is an erroneous key value.

##### MP1~4TTR_DELETE(comm, keyval)

IN comm communicator to which attribute is attached

(handle) IN keyval I The key value of the deleted attribute (integer)

int MPI-Attr-delete(MPI-Comm comm, int keyval)

MPI-ATTR-DELETE (COMM, KEYVAL, IERROR) 
INTEGER COMM, KEYVAL, IERROR 
Delete attribute from cache by key. This function invokes the attribute delete 
function delete_fn specified when the keyval was created. 

Whenever a communicator is replicated using the function MPI_COMM_DUP, all call-back copy functions for attributes that are currently set are invoked

(in arbitrary order). Whenever a communicator is deleted using the function

### MPI-COMM-FREE all callback delete functions for attributes that are currently set are invoked.

5.7.2 ATTRIBUTES EXAMPLE Advice to users. This example shows how to write a collective communica tion operation that uses caching to be more efficient after the first call. The coding style assumes that MPI function results return only error statuses.

(End of advice to users.)

/* key for this module’s stuff: */ static int gop_key = MPI_KEYVAL_INVALID;

typedef struct {

int ref_count; /* reference count */ /* other stuff, whatever else we want */ } gop_stuff_type;

Efficient_Collective_Op (comm, ...)

MPI_Comm comm; {

gop_stuff_type *gop_stuff; 
MPI_Group group; 
int foundflag; 

MPI_Comm_group(comm, &group);

if (gop_key == MPI_KEYVAL_INVALID) /* get a key on first call ever */ ~.

if ( ! MPI_Attr_keyval_create( gop_stuff_copier, 
gop_stuff_destructor, 
8cgop key, (void *)0)); 
/* get the key while assigning its copy and delete callback 
behavior. */ 

MPI_Abort (&dquo;Insufficient keys available&dquo;);

}

MPI_Attr_get (comm, gop_key, &:gop_stuff, &foundflag); J if (foundflag)

> ~

~ /* This module has executed in this group before.

We will use the cached information */

~

else /* This is a group that we have not yet cached anything in. ,

We will now do so.

*/

/* First, allocate storage for the stuff we want, , and initialize the reference count */

gop_stuff

=

(gop_stuff_type *) malloc (sizeof(gop_stuff_type)); if (gop_stuff == NULL) ~ /* abort on out-of-memory error */

gop_stuff -> ref_count = 1;

/* Second, fill in *gop_stuff with whatever we want.

This part isn’t shown here */ /* Third, store gop_stuff as the attribute value */

MPI_Attr_put ( comm, gop_key, gop_stuff);

}

/* Then, in any case, use contents of *gop_stuff to do the global op ... */

}

/* The following routine is called by MPI when a group is freed */ gop_stuff_destructor (comm, keyval, gop_stuff, extra)

MPI_Comm Comm;

int keyval;

&dquo;

gop_stuff_type *gop_stuff;

void *extra; {

if (keyval != gop_key) { /* abort -programming error */ /* The group’s being freed removes one reference to gop_stuff */ gop_stuff -> ref_count -= 1;

/* If no references remain, then free the storage *1 if (gop_stuff -> ref_count == 0) { free((void *)gop_stuff);

j

,

) , /* The following routine is called by MPI when a group is copied */

gop_stuff_copier (comm, keyval, gop_stuff, extra) 
MPI_Comm comm; 
int keyval; 
gop_stuff_type *gap_stuff; 

.

void *extra; {

if (keyval != gop_key) f /* abort -- programming error */ } /* The new group adds one reference to this gop_stuff */ gop_stuff -> ref_count += 1;

.

’

5.8 Formalizing the Loosely Synchronous Model In this section, we make further statements about the loosely synchronous model, with particular attention to intra-communication.

5.8.1 BASIC STATEMENTS When a caller passes a communicator (that contains a context and group) to a callee, that communicator must be free of side effects throughout execution of the subprogram: there should be no active operations on that communicator that might involve the process. This provides one model in which libraries can be written, and work &dquo;safely.&dquo; For libraries so designated, the callee has permission to do whatever communication it likes with the communicator, and under the above guarantee knows that no other communications will interfere. Since we permit good implementations to create new communicators without synchronization (such as by preallocated contexts on communicators), this does not impose a significant overhead. This form of safety is analogous to other common computer-science usages, such as passing a descriptor of an array to a library routine. The library routine has every right to expect such a descriptor to be valid and modifiable.

5.8.2 MODELS OF EXECUTION In the loosely synchronous model, transfer of control to a parallel procedure is effected by having each executing process invoke the procedure. The invocation is a collective operation: it is executed by all processes in the execution group, and invocations are similarly ordered at all processes. However, the invocation need not be synchronized. We say that a parallel procedure is active in a process if the process belongs to a group that may collectively execute the procedure, and some member of that group is currently executing the procedure code. If a parallel procedure is active in a process, then this process may be receiving messages pertaining to this procedure, even if it does not currently execute the code of this procedure.

Static communicator allocation

This covers the case where, at any point in time, at most one invocation of a parallel procedure can be active at any process, and the group of executing processes is fixed. For example, all invocations of parallel procedures involve all processes, processes are single-threaded, and there are no recursive invocations. In such a case, a communicator can be statically allocated to each proce dure. The static allocation can be done in a preamble, as part of initialization code. If the parallel procedures can be organized into libraries, so that only one procedure of each library can be concurrently active in each processor, then it is sufficient to allocate one communicator per library.

Dynamic communicator allocation

Calls of parallel procedures are well-nested if a new parallel procedure is always invoked in a subset of a group executing the same parallel procedure. Thus, processes that execute the same parallel procedure have the same execution stack. In such a case, a new communicator needs to be dynamically allocated for each new invocation of a parallel procedure. The allocation is done by the caller. A new communicator can be generated by a call to MPI_COMM_DUP, if the callee execution group is identical to the caller execution group, or by a call to MPI-COMM-SPLIT if the caller execution group is split into several subgroups executing distinct parallel routines. The new communicator is passed as an argument to the invoked routine. The need for generating a new communicator at each invocation can be alleviated or avoided altogether in some cases: If the execution group is not split, then one can allocate a stack of communicators in a preamble, and next manage the stack in a way that mimics the stack of recursive calls. One can also take advantage of the well-ordering property of communication to avoid confusing caller and callee communication, even if both use the same communicator. To do so, one needs to abide by the following two rules:

9 messages sent before a procedure call (or before a return from the proce dure) are also received before the matching call (or return) at the receiving end; . messages are always selected by source (no use is made of M PLANY _sou RC E) . The general case

In the general case, there may be multiple concurrently active invocations of the same parallel procedure within the same group; invocations may not be well nested. A new communicator needs to be created for each invocation. It is the user’s responsibility to make sure that, should two distinct parallel procedures be invoked concurrently on overlapping sets of processes, then communicator creation be properly coordinated.

CHAPTER 6

PROCESS TOPOLOGIES

6.1 Introduction This chapter discusses the MPI topology mechanism. A topology is an extra, op tional attribute that one can give to an intra-communicator; topologies cannot be added to inter-communicators. A topology can provide a convenient naming mechanism for the processes of a group (within a communicator), and addi tionally, may assist the runtime system in mapping the processes onto hardware. As stated in chapter 5, a process group in MPI is a collection of n processes. Each process in the group is assigned a rank between 0 and n-1. In many par allel applications a linear ranking of processes does not adequately reflect the logical communication pattern of the processes (which is usually determined by the underlying problem geometry and the numerical algorithm used). Often the processes are arranged in topological patterns such as two- or three-dimen sional grids. More generally, the logical process arrangement is described by a graph. In this chapter we will refer to this logical process arrangement as the &dquo;virtual topology.&dquo; A clear distinction must be made between the virtual process topology and the topology of the underlying, physical hardware. The virtual topology can be exploited by the system in the assignment of processes to physical processors, if this helps to improve the communication performance on a given machine. How this mapping is done, however, is outside the scope of MPI. The description of the virtual topology, on the other hand, depends only on the application, and is machine-independent. The functions that are proposed in this chapter deal only with machine-independent mapping.

R,a~iond~e. Though physical mapping is not discussed, the existence of the virtual topology information may be used as advice by the runtime sys tem. There are well-known techniques for mapping grid/torus structures to hardware topologies such as hypercubes or grids. For more compli cated graph structures good heuristics often yield nearly optimal results [20]. On the other hand, if there is no way for the user to specify the logical process arrangement as a &dquo;virtual topology,&dquo; a random mapping

is most likely to result. On some machines, this will lead to unnecessary contention in the interconnection network. Some details about predicted and measured performance improvements that result from good process to-processor mapping on modern wormhole-routing architectures can be found in [10, 9]. Besides possible performance benefits, the virtual topology can func tion as a convenient, process-naming structure, with tremendous benefits for program readability and notational power in message-passing program ming. (End of rationale. )

##### 6.2 Virtual Topologies

The communication pattern of a set of processes can be represented by a graph. The nodes stand for the processes, and the edges connect processes that com municate with each other. MPI provides message passing between any pair of processes in a group. There is no requirement for opening a channel explicitly. Therefore, a &dquo;missing link&dquo; in the user-defined process graph does not prevent the corresponding processes from exchanging messages. It means rather that this connection is neglected in the virtual topology. This strategy implies that the topology gives no convenient way of naming this pathway of communication. Another possible consequence is that an automatic mapping tool (if one exists for the runtime environment) will not take account of this edge when mapping. Edges in the communication graph are not weighted, so that processes are either simply connected or not connected at all.

Rationale. Experience with similar techniques in PARMACS [5, 8] show that this information is usually sufficient for a good mapping. Additionally, a more precise specification is more difficult for the user to set up, and it would make the interface functions substantially more complicated. (End of rationale.)

Specifying the virtual topology in terms of a graph is sufficient for all appli cations. However, in many applications the graph structure is regular, and the detailed set-up of the graph would be inconvenient for the user and might be less efficient at run time. A large fraction of all parallel applications use process topologies like rings, two- or higher-dimensional grids, or tori. These struc tures are completely defined by the number of dimensions and the numbers of processes in each coordinate direction. Also, the mapping of grids and tori is generally an easier problem then that of general graphs. Thus, it is desirable to

address these cases explicitly. 
Process coordinates in a cartesian structure begin their numbering at 0. 
Row-major numbering is always used for the processes in a cartesian structure. 

This means that, for example, the relation between group rank and coordinates for four processes in a (2 x 2) grid is as follows.

| | coord (0,0): | rank 0 | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | coord (0,1): | rank 1 | | |
| | coord (1,0): | rank 2 | | |
| | coord ( 1, I ) : | rank 3 | | |

##### 6.3 Embedding in MPI

The support for virtual topologies as defined in this chapter is consistent with other parts of MPI, and, whenever possible, makes use of functions that are defined elsewhere. Topology information is associated with communicators. It is added to communicators using the caching mechanism described in Chapter 5.

6.4 Overview of the Functions

The functions MPI_GRAPH_CREATE and MPI_CART_CREATE are used to create general (graph) virtual topologies and cartesian topologies, respectively. These topology creation functions are collective. As with other collective calls, the program must be written to work correctly, whether the call synchronizes or not. The topology creation functions take as input an existing communicator comm-old, which defines the set of processes on which the topology is to be mapped. A new communicator comm-topol is created that carries the topo logical structure as cached information (see Chapter 5). In analogy to func tion MPi_COMM_CREATE, no cached information propagates from comm-old to comm_topol. MPI-CART-CREATE can be used to describe cartesian structures of arbitrary dimension. For each coordinate direction one specifies whether the process structure is periodic or not. Note that an n-dimensional hypercube is an n dimensional torus with 2 processes per coordinate direction. Thus, special sup port for hypercube structures is not necessary. The local auxiliary function

MPI_DIMS_CREATE can be used to compute a balanced distribution of processes among a given number of dimensions. Rationale. Similar functions are contained in EXPRESS [22] and PAR-, MACS. ( End of rationale.) The function MPI_TOPO_TEST can be used to inquire about the topol ogy associated with a communicator. The topological information can be ex tracted from the communicator using the functions MPI_GRAPHDIMS_GET and MP!_GRAPH_GET, for general graphs, and MPI_CARTDIM_GET and MPI_CART_ GET, for cartesian topologies. Several additional functions are provided to ma nipulate cartesian topologies: the functions MPLCART-RANK and MPI_CART_ COORDS translate cartesian coordinates into a group rank, and vice versa; the function MPI_CART_SUB can be used to extract a cartesian subspace (analogous

to MPI_COMM_SPLIT) . The function MPI_CART_SHIFT provides the information needed to communicate with neighbors in a cartesian dimension. The two func tions MPI_GRAPH_NEIGHBORS_COUNT and MPI-GRAPH-NEIGHBORS can be used to extract the neighbors of a node in a graph. The function MPI-CART-SUB is collective over the input communicator’s group; all other functions are local. Two additional functions, MPI-GRAPH_MAP and MPLCART-MAP are pre sented in the last section. In general these functions are not called by the user directly. However, together with the communicator manipulation func tions presented in Chapter 5, they are sufficient to implement all other topology functions. Section 6.5.7 outlines such an implementation.

6.5 Topology Constructors 
6.5.1 CARTESIAN CONSTRUCTOR 

MPI-CART-CREATE(comm-old, ndims, dims, periods, reorder, comm-cart)

IN COmm_Old input communicator (handle)

IN ndims number of dimensions of cartesian grid (integer) IN dims integer array of size ndims specifying the number of processes in each dimension IN periods logical array of size ndims specifyingwhether the grid is periodic (true) or not (false) in each di mension

IN reorder ranking may be reordered (true) or not (false) 
(logical) 
OUT comm-cart communicator with new cartesian topology (han 
dle) _ 
int MPI_Cart-create(MPI_Comm comm-old, int ndims, int *dims, int *periods, 
int reorder, MPI_Comm *comm_cart) 
MPI_CART_CREATE(COMM_OLD, NDIMS, DIMS, PERIODS, REORDER, COMM-CART, IERROR) 
INTEGER COMM-OLD, NDIMS, DIMS(*), GOMM_CART, IERROR 
LOGICAL PERIODS(*), REORDER 

MPI_CART_CREATE returns a handle to a new communicator to which the cartesian topology information is attached. If reorder = false then the rank of each process in the new group is identical to its rank in the old group. Other wise, the function may reorder the processes (possibly so as to choose a good embedding of the virtual topology onto the physical machine). If the total size of the cartesian grid is smaller than the size of the group of comm, then some processes are returned MPI_COMM_NULL, in analogy to MPLCOMM-SPLIT. The call is erroneous if it specifies a grid that is larger than the group size.

6.5~.2 CARTESIAN CONVENIENCE FUNCTION: MPI_DlMS_CREATE

For cartesian topologies, the function MPI_DIMS_CREATE helps the user select a balanced distribution of processes per coordinate direction, depending on the number of processes in the group to be balanced and optional constraints that can be specified by the user. One use is to partition all the processes (the size of

### MPI_COMM_W®RLD’s group) into an n-dimensional topology.

MPI_DIMS_CREATE(nnodes, ndims, dims) M nnodes number of nodes in a grid (integer) IN ndims number of cartesian dimensions (integer) ~TNOUT dims integer array of size ndims specifying the number of nodes in each dimension int MPIJ)ims_create(int nnodes, int ndims, int *dims) MPI~IMS_CREATE(NNODES, NDIMS, DIMS, IERROR) INTEGER NNODES, NDIMS, DIMS(*), IERROR The entries in the array dims are set to describe a cartesian grid with ndims dimensions and a total of nnodes nodes. The dimensions are set to be as close to each other as possible, using an appropriate divisibility algorithm. The caller may further constrain the operation of this routine by specifying elements of array dims. If dims [1] is set to a positive number, the routine will not modify the number of nodes in dimension i; only those entries where dims Ci7 = 0 are modified by the call. Negative input values of dims Eil are erroneous. An error will occur if nnodes

is not a multiple of ~;.arm.~~t»o dims[i]. 
For dims [1J set by the call, dims Eil will be ordered in non-increasing order. 
Array dims is suitable for use as input to routine MPI_CART_CREATE. MPI_DIMS_ 
CREATE is local. 
Example 6.1 1 

fi.5.3 GENERAL (GRAPH) CONSTRUCTOR

##### MPI-GRAPH-CREATE(comm-old, nnodes, index, edges, reorder, comm-graph)

? Comrn_old input communicator without topology (handle) - 1, - -N., nnodes number of nodes in graph (integer)

IN index array of integers describing node degrees (see below)

I

’~h~’ edges array of integers describing graph edges (see 
below) 
M reorder ranking may be reordered (true) or not (false) 
(logical) 
OUT comm-graph communicator with graph topology added 

(handle)

int MPI_Graph_create(MPT_Comm comm-old, int nnodes, int *index, int *edges, int reorder, MPI-Comm *comm-graph)

MPI -GRAPH-CREATE (COMM -OLD, NNODES, INDEX, EDGES, REORDER, COMM-GRAPH, IERROR) INTEGER COMM-OLD, NNODES, INDEX(*), EDGES(*), COMM-GRAPH, IERROR LOGICAL REORDER

MPI_GRAPI~_CREATE returns a handle to a new communicator to which the graph topology information is attached. If reorder = false then the rank of each process in the new group is identical to its rank in the old group. Otherwise, the function may reorder the processes. If the size, nnodes, of the graph is smaller than the size of the group of comm, then some processes are returned MPI_C~MM_NUL~, in analogy to MPI_CART_CREATE and MPI-COMM-SPLIT. The call is erroneous if it specifies a graph that is larger than the group size of the input communicator. The three parameters nnodes, index and edges define the graph structure. nnodes is the number of nodes of the graph. The nodes are numbered from 0 to nnodes-1. The ith entry of array index stores the total number of neighbors of the first i graph nodes. The lists of neighbors of nodes 0, 1, ... , nnodes-1 are stored in consecutive locations in array edges. The array edges is a flat tened representation of the edge lists. The total number of entries in index is nnodes and the total number of entries in edges is equal to the number of graph edges. The definitions of the arguments nnodes, index, and edges are illustrated with

#### the following simple example.

### Example 6.2 Assume there are four processes 0, 1, 2, 3 with the following adja cency matrix:

Then, the input arguments are:

nnodes = 4 index = 2, 3, 4, fi , edges = 1, 3, ~, 3, 0, 2 Thus, in C, index [0] is the degree of node zero, and index [i] - index [i-1] is the degree of node i, i=1, ... , nnodes-1; the list of neighbors of node zero is stored in edges C j 7 , for o < j < index [0] - i and the list of neighbors of node i, i > 0, is stored in edges [j], index[i - 1) ~ j < index[i] ― 1. In Fortran, index(1) is the degree of node zero, and index(i+1) - index(i) is the degree of node i, i=l, ... , nnodes-1; the list of neighbors of node zero is stored in edges (j), for 1 < j < index(i) and the list of neighbors of node i, i > 0, is stored in edges ( j ), index(i) + 1 < j < index(i + 1~.

### Advice to implementors. The following topology information is likely to be stored with a communicator:

. Type of topology (cartesian/graph), 
. For a cartesian topology: 
1. ndims (number of dimensions), 
2. dims (numbers of processes per coordinate direction), 
3. periods (periodicity information), 
4. own-position (own position in grid, could also be computed from 

### rank and dims) ~ For a graph topology:

1. index, 
2. edges, 

which are the vectors defining the graph structure. For a graph structure the number of nodes is equal to the number of processes in the group. Therefore, the number of nodes does not have to be stored explicitly. An additional zero entry at the start of array index simplifies access to the topology information. (End ofadvice to implementors.)

6.5.4 TOPOLOGY INQUIRY FUNCTIONS

### If a topology has been defined with one of the above functions, then the topology information can be looked up using inquiry functions. They all are local calls.

MPI_T~PO_TEST~comm, status) IN COT1’1m communicator (handle) OUT status topology type of communicator comm (choice)

int MPI -Topo -test (MPI -Comm comm, int *status)

MPI-T0P0-TEST(CDMM, STATUS, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, STATUS, IERROR

### The function MP1 TOPO_TEST returns the type of topology that is assigned to a communicator.

#### The output value status is one of the following:

### MPI_GRAPH graph topology MPI_CART cartesian topology

MPI_UNDEFINED no topology

MPI_GRAPHDIMS_GET(comm, nnodes, nedges) IN COI7lm communicator for group with graph structure (handle) OUT nnodes number of nodes in graph (integer) (same as number of processes in the group) OUT nedges number of edges in graph (integer)

int MPI-Graphdims-get(MPI-Comm comm, int *nnodes, int *nedges)

MPI_GRAPHDIMS_GET(COMM, NNDDES, NEDGES, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, NNODES, NEDGES, IERROR

Functions MP!_GRAPHDIMS_GET and MPI_GRAPH_GET retrieve the graph topology information that was associated with a communicator by MPI_GRAPH_ CREATE. The information provided by MPI-GRAPHDIMS-GET can be used to dimen sion the vectors index and edges correctly for the following call to MPI_GRAPH_ GET.

##### MPI_GRAPH_GET(comm, maxindex, maxedges, index, edges) IN comm communicator with graph structure (handle)

IN maxindex length of vector index in the calling program

(integer) IN maxedges length of vector edges in the calling program

(integer) OUT index array of integers containing the graph structure

(for details see the definition of MPI_GRAPH_ CREATE) OUT edges array of integers containing the graph structure int MPI-Graph-get(MPI-Comm comm, int maxindex, int maxedges, int *index,

int *edges)

MPI_GRAPH_GET(COMM, MAXINDEX, MAXEDGES, INDEX, EDGES, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, MAXINDEX, MAXEDGES, INDEX(*), EDGES(*), IERROR

MPI_CARTDIM_GET(comm, ndims) IN Comm communicator with cartesian structure (handle) OUT ndims, number of dimensions of the cartesian structure

(integer)

int MPI_Cartdim_get(MPI_Comm comm, int *ndims)

MPI_CARTDIM_GET(COMM, NDIMS, IERROR) 
INTEGER COMM, NDIMS, IERROR 
The functions MPI-CARTDIM-GET and MPI_CART_GET return the cartesian 
topology information that was associated with a communicator by MPI_CART_ 
CREATE. 
MPI-CART-GET(comm, maxdims, dims, periods, coords) 
l#W Comm communicator with cartesian structure (handle) 
IN, maxdims length of vectors dims, periods, and coords in 

the calling program (integer) OUT dims number of processes for each cartesian dimen

sion (array of integer) OUT periods periodicity (true/false) for each cartesian dimen

sion (array of logical) OUT coords coordinates of calling process in cartesian struc

ture (array of integer)

int MPI_Cart_get(MPI_Comm comm, int maxdims, int *dims, int *periods, 
int *coords) 
MPI-CART-GET (COMM, MAXDIMS, DIMS, PERIODS, COORDS, IERROR) 
INTEGER COMM, MAXDIMS, DIMS(*), CDORDS(*), IERROR 
LOGICAL PERIODS(*) 
_ 

MPI-CART-RANK(comm, coords, rank) IN comm communicator with cartesian structure (handle) M coords integer array (of size ndims) specifying the carte

sian coordinates of a process

OUT rank rank of specified process (integer)

int MPI-Cart -rank (MPI -Comm comm, int *coords, int *rank)

MP I -CART-RANK ( CQMM , COORDS, RANK, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, COORDS(*), RANK, IERROR

For a process group with cartesian structure, the function MPI-CART-RANK translates the logical process coordinates to process ranks as they are used by the point-to-point routines. For dimension i with periods(i) = true, if the coordinate, coords(i), is out of range, that is, coords(i) < o or coords(i) ~ d~ms(i), it is shifted back to the interval o < coords(i) < dims(i) automatically. Out-of-range coordinates are erroneous for non-periodic dimensions.

MPI-CART-COORDS(comm, rank, maxdims, coords) It~ comm communicator with cartesian structure (handle) JN rank rank of a processwithin group of comm (integer) IN maXdimS length of vector coord in the calling program

(integer) OUT CoOrds integer array (of size ndims) containing the carte

sian coordinates of specified process

(integer)

int MPI-Cart-coords(MPI-Comm comm, int rank, int maxdims, int *coords)

MPI-CART-CDORDS(COMM, RANK, MAXDIMS, COORDS, IERROR) 
INTEGER COMM, RANK, MAXDIMS, COORDS(*), IERROR 
The inverse mapping, rank-to-coordinates translation is provided by MPI 
CART-COORDS. 

#### MPI-GRAPH-NEIGHBORS-COUNT(comm, rank, nneighbors)

IN I cOmm communicator with graph topology (handle) IN rank rank of process in group of comm (integer) OUT nneighbors number of neighbors of specified process

{integer)

int MPI_Graph~eighbors_count(MPI_Comm comm, int rank, int *nneighbors)

MFI_GRAPH~TEIGHBORS_CDUNT(CDMM, RANK, NNEIGHBORS, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, RANK, NNEIGHBORS, IERROR

### MPI-GRAPH-NEIGHBORS -COUNT and MPI_GRAPH_NEIGHBORS provide adjacency information for a general, graph topology. MPI_GRAPH_NEIGHBORS(comm, rank, maxneighbors, neighbors)

| | k4. | | comm | communicator with graph topology (handle) | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | Q4 | | rank | rank of process in group of comm (integer) | |
| | IN | | maxneighbors | size of array neighbors (integer) | |
| | OUT | | neighbors | ranks of processes that are neighbors to specified | |

process (array of integer)

int MPI-Graph-ne i ghbor s (MPI -Comm comm, int rank, int maxneighbors,

int *neighbors)

MPI_GRAPH_NEIGHBORS(COMM, RANK, MAXNEIGHBORS, NEIGHBORS, IERROR) INTEGER C01’9~i, RANK, MAXNEIGHBORS, NEIGHBORS(*), IERROR

Example 6.3 Suppose that comm is a communicator with a shuffle-exchange topol ogy. The group has 2n members. Each process is labeled by ar, ..., an with ai E { 0, 1 }, and has three neighbors: exchanger,..., an) = ai , ... , an-1, an (a = 1 a), shuffle(al, ... , an) = r,r,~, ... , an, a,, and unshuffle(aI, ..., an) = an , aI, ..., an-I’ The graph adjacency list is illustrated below for n = 3.

i , or i - - - >

Suppose that the communicator comm has this topology associated with it. The following code fragment cycles through the three types of neighbors and performs an appropriate permutation for each.

C assume: each process has stored a real number A. C extract neighborhood information

CALL MPI_COMM_RANK(eoznm, myrank, ierr) 
CALL MPI_GRAPH_NEIGHH~RS(co~,m, myrank, 3, neighbors, ierr) 
C perform exchange permutation 
CALL MPI_SENDRECV_REPLACE(A, 1, MPI_REAL, neighbors(1), 0, 
+ neighbors(1), 0, comm, status, ierr) 
C perform shuffle permutation 
CALL MPI~SENDRECV_REPLACE(A, 1, MPI_REAL, neighbors(2), 0, 
+ neighbors(3), 0, comm, status, ierr) 
C perform unshuffle permutation 
CALL MPI_SENDRECV_REPLACE(A, 1, MPI_REAL, neighbors(3), 0, 
+ neighbors~C2), 0, comm, status, ierr) 

6.5.5 CARTESIAN SHIFT COORDINATES If the process topology is a cartesian structure, a MPI_SE(~DRECV operation is likely to be used along a coordinate direction to perform a shift of data. As input, MPI_SE~JDRECV takes the rank of a source process for the receive, and

the rank of a destination process for the send. If the function M P I-CART-S H I FT is called for a cartesian process group, it provides the calling process with the above identifiers, which then can be passed to MPLSENDRECV. The user specifies the coordinate direction and the size of the step (positive or negative). The function is local.

MPI_CART_SHIFT(comm, direction, disp, rank-source, rank-dest) IN comm communicator with cartesian structure (handle) IN direction coordinate dimension of shift (integer) IN disp displacement (> 0: upwards shift, < 0: down

wards shift) (integer) OUT rank_sourCe rank of source process (integer) OUT rank-dest rank of destination process (integer)

int MPI_Cart_shift(MPI_Comm comm, int direction, int disp, int *ra.nk_sou.rce, 
int *rank-dest) 
MPI_CART-SHIFT(COMM, DIRECTION, DISP, RANK-SOURCE, RANK-DEST, IERROR) 
INTEGER COMM, DIRECTION, DISP, RANK-SOURCE, RANK-DEST, IERROR 

Depending on the periodicity of the cartesian group in the specified coor dinate direction, MPI_CART_SHIFT provides the identifiers for a circular or an end-off shift. In the case of an end-off shift, the value MPLPROCLNULL may be re turned in rank_souree or rank_dest, indicating that the source or the destination for the shift is out of range.

Example 6.4 The communicator, comm, has a two-dimensional, periodic, carte sian topology associated with it. A two-dimensional array of REALS is stored one element per process, in variable A. One wishes to skew this array, by shifting column i (vertically, i.e., along the column) by i steps.

C find process rank

CALL MPI_COI~~I_RANK(comm, rank, ierr)) C find cartesian coordinates

CALL MPI_CART_COL7RDS(comm, rank, maxdims, coords, ierr) C compute shift source and destination

CALL ~IPI_CART_SHI~&dquo;I’(comm, 1, coords(2), source, dest, ierr)

C skew array CALL MPI_SENDRECV-RFPLACE(A, 1, MPI_REAL, dest, 0, source, 0, comm, + status, ierr)

6.5.6 PARTITIONING OF CARTESIAN STRUCTURES

MPI_CART_SUB(comm, remain-dims, newcomm) IN comm communicator with cartesian structure (handle) IN remain-dims the ith entry of remain-dims specifies whether

the ith dimension is kept in the subgrid (true) or is dropped (false) (logical vector) OUT newcomm communicator containing the st-bgrid that

includes the calling process (handle)

int MPI_Cart_sub(MPI_Comm comm, int *remain-dims, MPI-Comm *newcomm)

MPI-CART-SUB (COMM, REMAIN-DIMS, NEWCOMM, IERROR) 
INTEGER COMM, NEWCDMM, IERROR 
LOGICAL REMAIN J)IMS(*) 
If a cartesian topology has been created with MPI-CART-CREATE, the func 
tion MPI_CART_SUB can be used to partition the communicator group into sub 
groups that form lower-dimensional cartesian subgrids, and to build for each 

subgroup a communicator with the associated subgrid cartesian topology. (This function is closely related to MPI-COMM-SPLIT.)

Example 6.5 Assume that MPI_CART_CREATE ( ... , comm) has defined a (2 x 3 x

4) grid. Let remain_dims = (true, false, true). Then a call to,

MPI_CART_SUB(comm, remain_dims, comm new), will create three communicators each with eight processes in a 2 x 4 carte sian topology. If remain-dims = (false, false, true) then the call to MPLCART SUB(comm, remain-dims, comm_rtew) will create six non-overlapping commu nicators, each with four processes, in a one-dimensional cartesian topology.

6.5.7 LOW LEVEL TOPOLOGY FUNCTIONS

The two additional functions introduced in this section can be used to implement all other topology functions. In general they will not be called by the user directly, unless he or she is creating additional virtual topology capability other than that provided by MPI.

MPI_CART_MAP(comm, ndims, dims, periods, newrank) iN comm input communicator (handle) 1N ndims number of dimensions of cartesian structure

(integer) IN- dims integer array of size ndims specifying the number of processes in each coordinate direction

IN’ periods logical array of size ndims specifying the periodic 
ity specification in each coordinate direction 
OUT newrank reordered rank of the calling process; MPLUN 
DEFINED if calling process does not belong to 

grid (integer)

int XPI -Cart -map (MP I -Comm comm, int ndims, int *dims, int *periods, 
int *newrank) 
MPI_CARTJMAPCCOMM, NDIMS, DIMS, PERIODS, NEWRANK, IERROR) 
INTEGER COMM, NDIMS, DIMS(*), NEWRANK, IERROR 
LOGICAL PERIODS(*) 
MPI_CART_MAP computes an &dquo;optimal&dquo; placement for the calling process 

### on the physical machine. A possible implementation of this function is to always return the rank of the calling process, that is, not to perform any reordering.

Advice to implementors. The function MPI-CART-CREATE(comm, ndims, dims, periods, reorder, comm_cart), with reorder = true can be imple mented by calling ~MPI_CART_MAP(comm, ndims, dims, periods, newrank), then calling MPI-COMM-SPLIT(comm, color, key, comm_carty, with color = 0 if newrank ~ MPI-UNDEFINED, color = MPI-UNDEFINED otherwise, and key = newrank. The function MPI-CART-SUB(comm, remain-dims, comm-new) can be implemented by a call to MPI-COMM-SPLIT(comm, color, key, comm new), using a single number encoding of the lost dimensions as color and a single number encoding of the preserved dimensions as key. All other cartesian topology functions can be implemented locally, us ing the topology information that is cached with the communicator. (End of advice to implementors.)

## The corresponding new function for general graph structures is as follows.

MPI_GRAPH_MAP(comm, nnodes, index, edges, newrank) IN comm input communicator (handle) IN nnodes number of graph nodes (integer) IN index integer array specifying the graph structure, see

MPI_GRAPH_CREATE IN edges integer array specifying the graph structure OUT newrank reordered rank of the calling process; MPI_UN

DEFINED if the calling process does not belong to graph (integer)

int MPI-Graph-map(MPI_Comm comm, int nnodes, int *index, int *edges, 
int *newrank) 
MPI_GRAFH~fAP(COMM, NNODES, INDEX, EDGES, NEWRANK, TERROR) 
INTEGER COMM, NNODES, INDEX(*), EDGES(*), NEWRANK, IERROR 

Advice to implementors. The function MPI-GRAPH-CREATE(comm, nnodes, index, edges, reorder, comm-graph), with reorder = true can be implemented by calling MPI_GRAPH_MAP(comm, nnodes, index, edges,

integer ndims, num~eigh logical reorder

parameter (ndims=2, num-neigh=4, reorder=.true.)

integer comm, comm-cart, dims(ndims), neigh-def(ndims), ierr integer neigh_rank(num~eigh), own_position(ndims), i, j logical periods(ndims) real*8 u(0:101,0:101), f(0:101,0:101) data dims / ndims * 0 / comm = MPI-COMM-WORLD

C Set process grid size and periodicity call MPI-DIMS-CREATE(comm, ndims, dims,ierr) periods(1) _ .TRUE. periods(2) = .TRUE.

C Create a grid structure in WORLD group and inquire about own position call MPI-CART-CREATE (comm, ndims, dims, periods, reorder, comm-cart,ierr) call MPI-CART-GET (comm-cart, ndims, dims, periods, own_position,ierr)

C Look up the ranks for the neighbors. Own process coordinates are (i,j). C Neighbors are (i-l,j), (i+l,j), (a.,j-1), (i,j+l) i = own_position(1) j = own_posi.t~.on(2) . neigh_def(1) = i-1 _ neigh-def(2) = j

’

call MPI_CART-RANK (comm-cart, neigh-def, neighsank(1),ierr) neigh_def(1) = i+1 neigh_def (2) = j call MPI-CART-RANK (comm_cart , neigh-def, neighoank (2),ierr) neigh_def (1) = i

neigh_def (2) = j-1 call MPI-CART-RANK (comm-cart, neigh-def, neigh~ank(3),ierr) neigh_d~:f (1) = i

=

neigh_def(~)

j+1 call MPI-CART-RANK (comm-cart, neigh-def, neigh-rank(4),ierr) C Initialize the grid functions and start the iteration

call init (u, f) do 10 it=1,100 call relax (u, f)

C Exchange data with neighbor processes

call exchange (u, comm-cart, neigh-rank, num-neigh) 10 continue

| 10 continue | | |
| --- | --- | --- |
| call output (u) | | |
| end | | |

Fig. 6.1 Set-up of process structure for two-dimensional parallel Poisson solver.

newrank), then calling MPI-COMM-SPLIT(comm, color, key, comm_graph~, with color = 0 if newrank =1= MPI-UNDEFINED, color = MPI-UNDEFINED otherwise, and key = newrank.

### All other graph topology functions can be implemented locally, using the topology information that is cached with the communicator. (End of advice ta i~~lementor.s. )

6.6 An Application Example 
Example 6.6 The example in figure 6.1 shows how the grid definition and in 
quiry functions can be used in an application program. A partial differential 
equation, for instance the Poisson equation, is to be solved on a rectangular do 
main. First, the processes organize themselves in a two-dimensional structure. 
Each process then inquires about the ranks of its neighbors in the four directions 
(up, down, right, left). The numerical problem is solved by an iterative method, 
the details of which are hidden in the subroutine relax. 
In each relaxation step each process computes new values for the solution 

grid function at all points owned by the process. Then the values at inter-process boundaries have to be exchanged with neighboring processes. For example, the exchange subroutine might contain a call like !B/)PLSEND(... ,neigh_rank(1 ),... ) to send updated values to the left-hand neighbor (i-l,j).

CHAPTER 7

MPI ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT

This chapter discusses routines for getting and, where appropriate, setting var ious parameters that relate to the MPI implementation and the execution en vironment (such as error handling). The procedures for entering and leaving the MPI execution environment are also described here.

7.1 Implementation information 
7.1.1 ENVIRONMENTAL INQUIRIES 
A set of attributes that describe the execution environment are attached to the 
communicator MPI_COMM_WORLD when MPI is initialized. The value of these 
attributes can be inquired by using the function MP)JBTTRJ3ET described in 
Chapter 5. It is erroneous to delete these attributes or free their keys. 
The list of predefined attribute keys include: 
MPLTAGJJB Upper bound for tag value. 
MPI_HOST Host process rank, if such exists, MPI_PROC_NULL, otherwise. 
MPUO rank of a node that has regular I/O facilities (possibly myrank). Nodes 
in the same communicator may return different values for this parameter. 

Vendors may add implementation-specific parameters (such as node num ber, real memory size, virtual memory size, etc.). The required parameter values are discussed in more detail below.

Tag values Tag values range from 0 to the value returned for MPI_TAG_UB inclusive. These values are guaranteed to be unchanging during the execution of an MPI pro gram. In addition, the tag upper bound value must be at least 32767. An MPI implementation is free to make the value of MPI_TAG_UB larger than this; for example, the value 23° - 1 is also a legal value for MPI_TAG_UB.

Host rank The value returned for MPI_HOST gets the rank of the HOST process in the group as sociated with communicator MPI_COMM_WORLD, if there is such. MPl_PROC_NULL is returned if there is no host. MPI does not specify what it means for a process to be a HOST, nor does it require that a HOST exists.

10 rank

The value returned for MPI-10 is the rank of a processor that can provide language standard I/O facilities. For Fortran, this means that all of the Fortran I/O oper ations are supported (e.g., OPEN, REWIND, WRITE). For C, this means that all of the

ANSI-C I/O operations are supported (e.g., fopen, f printf, lseek). 
If every process can provide language-standard I/O, then the value MPI-ANY 
SOURCE must be returned. If no process can provide language-standard I/O, 
then the value MPI_PROC_NULL must be returned. If several processes can provide 
I/O, then any of them may be returned. The same value (rank) need not be 
returned by all processes. 
MPI_GET_PROCESSOR_NAME( name, resultlen } 
OUT name A unique specifier for the actual (as opposed to 
virtual) node. 
OUT resultlen Length (in printable characters) of the result re 
turned in name 

int MPI_Get_processor~ame(char *name, int *resultlen)

MPI-GET-PROCESSOR-NAME( NAME, RESULTLEN, IERROR) CHARACTER*(*) NAME .

INTEGER RESULTLEN,IERROR This routine returns the name of the processor on which it was called at the moment of the call. The name is a character string for maximum flexibility. From this value it must be possible to identify a specific piece of hardware; possi ble values include &dquo;processor 9 in rack 4 of mpp.cs.org&dquo; and &dquo;231&dquo; (where 231 is the actual processor number in the running homogeneous system). The argu ment name must represent storage that is at least MPI_MAX_PROCESSOR_NAME characters long. MPI-GET-PROCESSOR-NAME may write up to this many char acters into name.

The number of characters actually written is returned in the output argu ment, resultlen. Rationale, This function allows M PI implementations that do process mi gration to return the current processor. Note that nothing in M PI requires or defines process migration; this definition of MPI_GET_PROCESSOR_NAME simply allows such an implementation. (End of ra~io~ale.)

Adviae to users. The user must provide at least MPi_MAX_PROCESSOR_NAME space to write the processor name-processor names can be this long. The user should examine the ouput argument, resultlen., to determine the actual length of the name. (End of advice to users.)

7.2 Error Handling An MPI implementation cannot or may choose not to handle some errors that occur during MPI calls. These can include errors that generate exceptions or traps, such as floating point errors or access violations. The set of errors that are handled by MPI is implementation-dependent. Each such error generates an MPI exception. A user can associate an error handler with a communicator. The specified error handling routine will be used for any MPI exception that occurs during a call to MPI for a communication with this communicator. MPI calls that are not related to any communicator are considered to be attached to the communica tor MPl_COMM_WORLD. The attachment of error handlers to communicators is purely local: different processes may attach different error handlers to the same communicator. A newly created communicator inherits the error handler that is associated

with the &dquo;parent&dquo; communicator. In particular, the user can specify a &dquo;global&dquo; 
error handler for all communicators by associating this handler with the com 
municator MPI_COMM_WORLD immediately after initialization. 
Several predefined error handlers are available in MPI: 
MPI-ERRORS-ARE-FATAL The handler, when called, causes the program to abort 
on all executing processes. This has the same effect as if MPLABORT was 
called by the process that invoked the handler. 
MPI_ERRORS_RETURN The handler has no effect. 

Implementations may provide additional predefined error handlers and pro grammers can code their own error handlers. The error handler MPI_ERRORS~4RE_FATAL is associated by default with MPI COMM_WORLD after initialization. Thus, if the user chooses not to control error handling, every error that MPI handles is treated as fatal. Since (almost) all MPI calls return an error code, a user may choose to handle errors in its main code, by testing the return code of MP1 calls and executing a suitable recovery code when the call was not successful. In this case, the error handler MPI_ERRORS_RETURN will be used. Usually it is more convenient and more efficient not to test for errors after each MPI call, and have such error handled by a nontrivial MPI error handler. After an error is detected, the state of MPI is undefined. That is, using a user-defined error handler, or MPLERRORSJRETURN, does not necessarily allow the user to continue to use MPI after an error is detected. The purpose of these error handlers is to allow a user to issue user-defined error messages and to take actions unrelated to MPI (such as flushing I/O buffers) before a program exits.

An MPI implementation is free to allow MPI to continue after an error but is not required to do so.

Advice to implen?,entors. A good-quality implementation will, to the greatest possible extent, circumscribe the impact of an error, so that normal processing can continue after an error handler was invoked. The imple mentation documentation will provide information on the possible effect

of each class of errors. (End of advice to impleyrzenlars.) An MPI error handler is an opaque object, which is accessed by a handle. MPI calls are provided to create new error handlers, to associate error handlers with communicators, and to test which error handler is associated with a com municator.

MPI_ERRHANDLER_CREATE( function, errhandler ) IN function user-defined error handling procedure OUT errhandler MPI error handler (handle)

int MPI-Errhandler-create(MPI-Handler-f unction *function, 
MPI~rrhandler *errhandler) 
MPI-ERRHANDLER-CREATE(FUNCTIDN, HANDLER, IERRDR) 
EXTERNAL FUNCTION 
INTEGER ERRHANDLER, IERROR 
Register the user routine function for use as an MPI exception handler. 
Returns in errhandler a handle to the registered exception handler. 
Advice to iniple-ynentors. The handle returned may contain the address of 
the error handling routine. This call is superfluous in C, which has a refer 

#### encing operator, but is necessary in Fortran. (End of advice to implementors.)

The user routine should be a C function of type MPLHandler _function, which is defined as:

typedef void (MPI Handler_function7(MPI_Comm *, int *, ...);

The first argument is the communicator in use. The second is the error code to be returned by the MPI routine. The remaining arguments are &dquo;stdargs&dquo; arguments whose number and meaning is implementation-dependent. An im plementation should clearly document these arguments. Addresses are used so that the handler may be written in Fortran.

Rationale. The variable argument list is provided because it provides an ANSI-standard hook for providing additional information to the error handler; without this hook, ANSI-C prohibits additional arguments. (End

### of rationale.)

MPf_ERRHANDLER_SET( comm, errhandler )

lN COl’Ilt1&dquo;? communicator to set the error handler for

(handle) M errhandler r new MPI error handler for communicator

(handle)

int MPI-Errhandler-set (MPT-Comm comm, MPI-Errhandler errhandler)

MPI-ERRHANDLER -SET ( C DMM , ERRHANDLER, TERROR) INTEGER COMM, ERRHANDLER, IERROR

Associates the new error handler errorhandler with communicator comm at the calling process. Note that an error handler is always associated with the communicator.

MPI_ERRHANDLER_GET( comm, errhandler )

M Comm. communicator to get the error handler from

(handle) OUT errhandler r MPI error handler currently associated with com

municator (handle)

int MPI_Errhandler_get(MPI_Comm comm, MPI-Errhandler *errhandler)

MPI-ERRHANDLER-GET (COMM, ERRHANDLER, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, ERRHANDLER, IERROR

#### Returns in errhandler (a handle to) the error handler that is currently asso

ciated with communicator comm.

Example: A library function may register at its entry point the current error handler for a communicator, set its own private error handler for this commu nicator, and restore before exiting the previous error handler.

MPI_ERRHANDLER_FREE( errhandler y

IN errhandler MPI error handler (handle)

int MPI-Errhandler-free(MPI-Errhandler *errhandler) MPI~RRHANDLER_F’REE(ERRHANDLER, IERROR) INTEGER ERRHANDLER, IERROR

Marks the error handler associated with errhandler for deallocation and sets errhandler to MPI_ERRHANDLER_NULL. The error handler will be deallocated after all communicators associated with it have been deallocated.

MPI_ERROR_STRINGt errorcode, string, resultlen ) IN errorcode Error code returned by an MPI routine OUT string Text that corresponds to the errorcode

-

OUT resultlen Length (in printable characters) of the result re

turned in string

int MPI~rror_string(int errorcode, char *string, int *resultlen) MPI~RROR_STRING(ERRORCODE, STRING, RESULTLEN, IERROR) INTEGER ERRORCODE, RESULTLEN, IERROR

’

CHARACTER*(*) STRING

Returns the error string associated with an error code. The argument string must represent storage that is at least MPI_MAX_ERROR_STRING characters long. The number of characters actually written is returned in the output argu ment, resultlen. Rationale. The form of this function was chosen to make the Fortran and C bindings similar. A version that returns a pointer to a string has two difficulties. First, the return string must be statically allocated and different for each error message (allowing the pointers returned by successive calls to MPLERROR-STRING to point to the correct message). Second, in Fortran, a function declared as returning CHARACTER*(*) cannot be referenced in, for example, a PRINT statement. (End of rationale.)

7.3 Error Codes and Classes

The error codes returned by MPI are left entirely to the implementation (with the exception of MPI_SUCCESS). This is done to allow an implementation to provide as much information as possible in the error code (for use with MPI_ERROR_

STRING). 
To make it possible for an application to interpret an error code, the routine 
MPI_ERROR_CLASS converts an error code into one of a small set of specified 
values, called error classes. Valid error classes include 
MPI_SUCCESS No error 

MPI_ERR_BUFFER Invalid buffer pointer MPI_ERR_COUNT Invalid count argument MPI_ERR_TYPE Invalid datatype argument MPI-ERR-TAG Invalid tag argument MPI_ERR_COMM Invalid communicator MPI_ERR_RANK Invalid rank

MPI_ERR_REQUEST Invalid request (handle) MPI_ERR_ROOT Invalid root

MPI_ERR_GROUP Invalid group .

MPI_ERR_OP Invalid operation MPI_ERR_TOPOLOGY Invalid topology MPI_ERR_DIMS Invalid dimension argument

_ MPLERR-ARG Invalid argument of some other kind MPI_ERR_UNKNOWN Unknown error MPI_ERR_TRUNCATE Message truncated on receive MPI_ERR_OTHER Known error not in this list MPLERRJNTERN Internal MPI error

MPI_ERR_LASTGODE Last standard error code

#### An implementation is free to define more error classes; however, the stan dard error classes must be used where appropriate. The error classes satisfy,

0 = MPI_SUCCESS < MPI_ERR_ ... ~ MPI-ERR-LASTCODE. Rationale. The difference between MPI-ERR-UNKNOWN and MP1_ERR_OTHER is that MPLERROR_STR1NG can return useful information about MPLERR OTHER.

Note that MPLSUCCESS = 0 is necessary to be consistent with C practice; the separation of error classes and error codes allows us to define the error classes this way. Having a known LASTCODE is often a nice sanity check as

##### well. (End of rationale.)

MPI_ERROR_GLASS( errorcocfe, errorclass ) 
LT1 errorcode Error code returned by an MPI routine 
OUT errorclass Error class associated with errorcode 
int MPI-Error_class(int errorcode, int *errorclass) 
MPI-ERROR-CLASS(ERRORCODE, ERRORCLASS, IERROR) 
INTEGER ERRORCODE, ERRORCLASS, IERROR 

7.4 Timers

M PI defines a timer. A timer is specified even though it is not &dquo;message-passing,&dquo; because timing parallel programs is important in &dquo;performance debugging&dquo; and because existing timers (both in POSIX 1003.1-1988 and 1003.4D 14.1 and in

### Fortran 90) are either inconvenient or do not provide adequate access to high resolution timers.

MPi_WTIME()

double MPI-Wtime(void) DOUBLE PRECISION MPI_WTIME()

M PI _WTI M E returns a floating point number of seconds, representing elapsed wall-clock time since some time in the past. The &dquo;time in the past&dquo; is guaranteed not to change during the life of the process. The user is responsible for converting large numbers of seconds to

### other units if they are preferred.

This function is portable (it returns seconds, not &dquo;ticks&dquo;), it allows high resolution, and carries no unnecessary baggage. One would use it like this: I

double starttime, endtime; 
starttime = double 3~PI_Wtime () ; 
 ... stuff to be timed ... 
endtime = double MPI_Wtime(); 
printf(&dquo;That took %f seconds‘~n&dquo;,endt~.me-starttime); 

}

The times returned are local to the node that called them. There is no requirement that different nodes return &dquo;the same time.&dquo;

MPI WTICK(?

double MPI-Wtick(void) DOUBLE PRECISION MPI_WTICK() MPI_WTICK returns the resolution of MPI_WTIME in seconds. That is, it returns, as a double precision value, the number of seconds between successive clock ticks. For example, if the clock is implemented by the hardware as a counter that is incremented every millisecond, the value returned by MPI_WTiCK should be 10-:1,

7.5 Startup One goal of MPI is to achieve source cacle portability. By this we mean that a program written using MPI and complying with the relevant language standards is portable as written, and must not require any source code changes when moved from one system to another. This explicitly does not say anything about how an MPI program is started or launched from the command line, nor what the user must do to set up the environment in which an MPI program will run. However, an implementation may require some setup to be performed before other MPI routines may be called. To provide for this, MPI includes an initialization routine MPUNIT.

MPI_INIT(a

int MPI_Init(int *argc, char ***argv) 
~iPI_INIT (IERR©R) 
INTEGER IERROR 

This routine must be called before any other MPl routine. It must be called at most once; subsequent calls are erroneous (see MPI-INITIALIZED). All MPI programs must contain a call to MPI-init; this routine must be called

before any other MPI routine (apart from MPI_INITTALIZED) is called. The version for ANSI-C accepts the argc and argv that are provided by the arguments to main:

MPI_init( argc, argv );

The Fortran version takes only IERROR.

MPLHNAUZEO int MPI~’inalize (void) MPI -FINALIZE (IERROR) INTEGER IERROR

This routine cleans up all MPI states. Once this routine is called, no MPI rou tine (even MPI_INIT) may be called. The user must ensure that all pending com munications involving a process complete before the process calls MPLFINALIZE.

#### MPI-INITIALIZED(flag )

OUT flag Flag is true if MPI_INIT has been called and false otherwise.

int MPI-Initialized(int *flag) 
MPI-INITIALIZED(FLAG, IERROR) 
LOGICAL FLAG 
INTEGER IERROR 

This routine may be used to determine whether MPI_INIT has been called. It is the only routine that may be called before MPUNIT is called.

MPI-ABORT(comm, errorcode )

IN COmm communicator of tasks to abort IN errorcode error code to return to invoking environment int MPI~bort(MPI_Comm comm, int errorcode)

MPI-ABORT(COMM, ERRORCODE, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, ERRORCODE, IERROR

### This routine makes a &dquo;best attempt&dquo; to abort all tasks in the group of comm.

This function does not require that the invoking environment take any action with the error code. However, a Unix or POSIX environment should handle this as a return errorcode from the main program or an abort (errorcode). MPI implementations are required to define the behavior of MPI-ABORT at least for a comm of MPLCOMivLWORLD. MPI implementations may ignore the comm argument and act as if the comm was MPLCOMtvLWORLD.

*~*w

CHAPTER 8

PROFILING INTERFACE

8.1 Requirements 
To meet the MPI profiling interface, an implementation of the MPI functions 
must 

1. provide a mechanism through which all of the MPI defined functions may be accessed with a name shift. Thus all of the MPI functions (which nor

mally start with the prefix &dquo;MPI-&dquo;) should also be accessible with the prefix &dquo;PMPI_&dquo;. 2. ensure that those MPI functions which are not replaced may still be linked into an executable image without causing name clashes. 3. document the implementation of different language bindings of the MPI

interface if they are layered on top of each other, so that the profiler developer knows whether she must implement the profile interface for each binding, or can economize by implementing it only for the lowest level routines. 4. where the implementation of different language bindings is done through a layered approach (e.g., the Fortran binding is a set of &dquo;wrapper&dquo; functions which call the C implementation), ensure that these wrapper functions are separable from the rest of the library. This is necessary to allow a separate profiling library to be correctly implemented, since (at least with Unix linker semantics) the profiling li brary must contain these wrapper functions if it is to perform as expected. This requirement allows the person who builds the profiling library to ex tract these functions from the original MPI library and add them into the profiling library without bringing along any other unnecessary code.

### 5. provide a no-op routine MPI_PCONTROL in the MPI library.

8.2 Discussion 
The objective of the MPI profiling interface is to ensure that it is relatively easy 
for authors of profiling (and other similar) tools to interface their codes to MPI 
implementations on different machines. 

~*

Since MPI is a machine-independent standard with many different imple mentations, it is unreasonable to expect that the authors of profiling tools for

MPI will have access to the source code which implements MPI on any particular machine. It is therefore necessary to provide a mechanism by which the implementors of such tools can collect whatever performance information they wish without access to the underlying implementation. We believe that having such an interface is important if MPI is to be attractive to end users, since the availability of many different tools will be a significant factor in attracting users to the MPI standard. The profiling interface is just that, an interface. It says notching about the way in which it is used. There is therefore no attempt to lay down what information is collected through the interface, or how the collected information is saved, filtered, or displayed. While the initial impetus for the development of this interface arose from the desire to permit the implementation of profiling tools, it is clear that an interface like that specified may also prove useful for other purposes, such as &dquo;internetworking&dquo; multiple MPI implementations. Since all that is defined is an interface, there is no objection to its being used wherever it is useful. As the issues being addressed here are intimately tied up with the way in which executable images are built, which may differ greatly on different ma chines, the examples given below should be treated solely as one way of imple menting the objective of the MPI profiling interface. The actual requirements made of an implementation are those detailed in the Requirements section above; the whole of the rest of this chapter is only present as justification and discussion of the logic for those requirements. The examples below show one way in which an implementation could be constructed to meet the requirements on a Unix system (there are doubtless others which would be equally valid).

8.3 Logic of the Design Provided that an MPI implementation meets the requirements above, it is possi ble for the implementor of the profiling system to intercept all of the MPI calls which are made by the user program. She can then collect whatever informa tion she requires before calling the underlying MPI implementation (through its name shifted entry points) to achieve the desired effects. 8.3.1 MISCELLANEOUS CONTROL OF PROFILING There is a clear requirement for the user code to be able to control the profiler dynamically at run time. This is normally used for (at least) the purposes of

~ Enabling and disabling profiling depending on the state of the calculation. 
~ Flushing trace buffers at non-critical points in the calculation. 
~ Adding user events to a trace file. 

### These requirements are met by use of the MPI_PCONTROL.

MPI-PCONTROL(level, . , . )

IN level l Profiling TeveZ

int MPI~control(const int level, ...) 
MPI~CQNTROL(level) 
INTEGER LEVEL, ... 

MPI libraries themselves make no use of this routine, and simply return immediately to the user code. However, the presence of calls to this routine allows a profiling package to be explicitly called by the user. Since MPI has no control of the implementation of the profiling code, we are unable to specify precisely the semantics which will be provided by calls to MPI_PCONTROL. This vagueness extends to the number of arguments to the

function, and their datatypes. 
However, to provide some level of portability of user codes to different pro 
filing libraries, we request the following meanings for certain values of level. 
~ level==o Profiling is disabled. 
level==1 Profiling is enabled at a normal default level of detail. 
level==2 Profile buffers are flushed. (This may be a no-op in some pro 
filers). 
~ All other values of level have profile library defined effects and additional 
arguments. 
We also request that the default state after MPUNIT has been called is for 
profiling to be enabled at the normal default level (i.e., as if MPI_PCONTROL had 

### just been called with the argument 1). This allows users to link with a profiling library and obtain profile output without having to modify their source code at all.

The provision of MPI_PCONTROL as a no-op in the standard MPI library allows them to modify their source code to obtain more detailed profiling infor mation, but still be able to link exactly the same code against the standard MPI

### library.

8.4 Examples 
8.4.1 PROFILER IMPLEMENTATION 

Suppose that the profiler wislles to accumulate the total amount of data sent by 
the MPI-SEND function, along with the total elapsed time spent in the function. 
This could trivially be achieved thus: 
static int totalBytes; 
static double totalTime; 

int MPI_SEND(void * buffer, const int count, MPI-Datatype datatype,

~

int dest, int tag, MPI_comm comm)

{

double tstart = MPI_Wtime(); /* Pass on all the arguments */

int extent; int result =

PMPI_Send(buffer,count,datatype,dest,tag,cbmm);

/* Accumulate byte count */ totalBytes += count * MPI_Type_size(datatype,&extent); /* and time */

totalTime += MPI_Wtime() - tstart;

return result;

J

8.4.2 MPI LIBRARY IMPLEMENTATION On a Unix system, in which the MPI library is implemented in C, there are various possible options, of which two of the most obvious are presented here. Which is better depends on whether the linker and compiler support weak symbols.

##### Systems with weak symbols

If the compiler and linker support weak external symbols (e.g., Solaris 2.x, other system V.4 machines), then only a single library is required through the use of #pragma weak thus:

#pragma weak MPI_Example = PMPI_Example int PMPI_Example(/* appropriate args */) {

/* Useful content */

X&dquo;

The effect of this #pragma is to define the external symbol MPI~xamp3e as a weak definition. This means that the linker will not complain if there is another definition of the symbol (for instance in the profiling library), however, if no .

other definition exists, then the linker will use the weak definition.

Systems without weak symbols

In the absence of weak symbols then one possible solution would be to use the C macro pre-processor thus:

#ifdef PROFILELIB

# ifdef STDC 
# define FUNCTION(name) P##name 
# else 

.# define FUNCTION(name) P/**/name 
# endif 
#else 
# define FUNCTION(name) name 

&dquo;

#endif

Each of the user visible functions in the library would then be declared thus: int FUNCTION(MPI_Example)(/* appropriate args */)

’

/* Useful content */

The same source file can then be compiled to produce both versions of the library, depending on the state of the PROFILELIB macro symbol. It is required that the standard MPI library be built in such a way that the inclusion of MPI functions can be achieved one at a time. This is a somewhat unpleasant requirement, since it may mean that each external function has to be compiled from a separate file. However, this is necessary so that the author of the profiling library need only define those MPI functions which she wishes

to intercept, references to any others being fulfilled by the normal MPI library. 
Therefore the link step can look something like this: 
% cc ... -lmyprof -lpmpi -lmpi 

Here libmyprof . a contains the profiler functions which intercept some of the MPI functions. li~pmpi.a contains the &dquo;name shifted&dquo; MPI functions, and libmpi . a contains the normal definitions of the MPI functions. 8.4.3 COMPLICATIONS

Multiple counting Since parts of the MPI library may themselves be implemented using more ba sic MPI functions (e.g., a portable implementation of the collective operations implemented using point-to-point communications), there is potential for pro filing functions to be called from within an MPI function which was called from a profiling function. This could lead to &dquo;double counting&dquo; of the time spent in the inner routine. Since this effect could actually be useful under some cir cumstances (e.g., it might allow one to answer the question &dquo;How much time is spent in the point-to-point routines when they’re called from collective func tions ?&dquo;), we have decided not to enforce any restrictions on the author of the MPI library which would overcome this. Therefore the author of the profiling library should be aware of this problem, and guard against it herself. In a sin gle-threaded world this is easily achieved through use of a static variable in the profiling code which remembers if you are already inside a profiling routine. It becomes more complex in a multi-threaded environment (as does the meaning of the times recorded!).

-

Linker oddities The Unix linker traditionally operates in one pass: the effect of this is that functions from libraries are only included in the image if they are needed at the time the library is scanned. When combined with weak symbols, or multiple definitions of the same function, this can cause odd (and unexpected) effects. Consider, for instance, an implementation of M PI in which the Fortran bind ing is achieved by using wrapper functions on top of the C implementation. The author of the profile library then assumes that it is reasonable only to provide profile functions for the C binding, since Fortran will eventually call these, and the cost of the wrappers is assumed to be small. However, if the wrapper func tions are not in the profiling library, then none of the profiled entry points will be undefined when the profiling library is called. Therefore, none of the profiling code will be included in the image. When the standard MPI library is scanned, the Fortran wrappers will be resolved, and will also pull in the base versions of the MPI functions. The overall effect is that the code will link successfully, but will not be profiled. To overcome this we must ensure that the Fortran wrapper functions are included in the profiling version of the library. We ensure that this is possible by requiring that these be separable from the rest of the base MPI libraty. This allows them to be ared out of the base library and into the profiling one.

8.5 Multiple Levels of Interception The scheme given here does not directly support the nesting of profiling func tions, since it provides only a single alternative name for each MPI function. Consideration was given to an implementation which would allow multiple lev els of call interception; however, we were unable to construct an implementation of this which did not have the following disadvantages: ~ assuming a particular implementation language. ~ imposing a run time cost even when no profiling was taking place. Since one of the objectives of MPI is to permit efficient, low latency implementa tions, and it is not the business of a standard to require a particular implement tation language, we decided to accept the scheme outlined above. Note, however, that it is possible to use the scheme above to implement a multi-level system, since the function called by the user may call many different profiling functions before calling the underlying MPI function. Unfortunately such an implementation may require more cooperation be tween the different profiling libraries than is required for the single-level imple mentation detailed above.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

[ 1 ] V. Bala and S. Kipnis. Process groups: a mechanism for the coordination of and communication among processes in the Venus collective communica tion library. Technical report, IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, October

1992. Preprint. [2] V. Bala, S. Kipnis, L. Rudolph, and Marc Snir. Designing efficient, scalable, and portable collective communication libraries. Technical report, IBM

T. J. Watson Research Center, October 1992. Preprint. 
[3] Purushotham V. Bangalore, Nathan E. Doss, and Anthony Skjellum. MPI++: 
Issues and Features. In OON SKI ’94, in press, 1994. 
[4] A. Beguelin, J. Dongarra, A. Geist, R. Manchek, and V. Sunderam. Visu 
alization and debugging in a heterogeneous environment. IEEE Computer, 
26(6):88-95, June 1993. 
[5] Luc Bomans and Rolf Hempel. The Argonne/GMD macros in FORTRAN 
for portable parallel programming and their implementation on the Intel 
iPSC/2. Parallel Computing, 15:119-1 S2, 1990. 
[6] R. Butler and E. Lusk. User’s guide to the p4 programming system. Tech 
nical Report TM-ANL-92/17, Argonne National Laboratory, 1992. 

[7] Ralph Butler and Ewing L,usk. Monitors, messages, and clusters: the p4 parallel programming system. Journal of Parallel Computing, 1994. to appear (Also Argonne National Laboratory Mathematics and Computer Science

Division preprint P362-0493). [8] Robin Calkin, Rolf Hempel, Hans-Christian Hoppe, and Peter Wypior. Portable programming with the parmacs message-passing library. Parallel

Computing, Special issue on message-passing interfaces, to appear. 
[9] S. Chittor and R. J. Enbody. Performance evaluation of mesh-connected 
wormhole-routed networks for interprocessor communication in multi 
computers. In Proceedings of the 1990 Supercomputing Conference, pages 647- 
656, 1990. 
[10] S. Chittor and R. J. Enbody. Predicting the effect of mapping on the 
communication performance of large multicomputers. In Proceedings of 

S!

the 1991 International Conference on Parallel Processing, vol. II (Software), pages II-I - 11-4, 1991. [11] J. Dongarra, A. Geist, R. Manchek, and V. Sunderam. Integrated PVM

framework supports heterogeneous network computing. Comlbuters in Physics, 7 ( 2 ) :16fi-75, April I 993. [ 12] J. J. Dongarra, R. Hempel, A. J. G. Hey, and D. W. Walker. A proposal for a user-level, message passing interface in a distributed memory environment.

Technical Report TM-12231, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, February 1993. [ 13] Nathan Doss, William Gropp, Ewing Lusk, and Anthony Skjellum. A model

implementation of MPI. Technical report, Argonne National Laboratory, 
1993. 
[14] Edinburgh Parallel Computing Centre, University of Edinburgh. CHIMP 
Concepts,june 1991. 
[ 15] Edinburgh Parallel Computing Centre, University of Edinburgh. CHIMP 
Version l.Olnterface, May 1992. 
[16] D. Feitelson. Communicators: Object-based multiparty interactions for 
parallel programming. Technical Report 91-12, Dept. Computer Science, 
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, November 1991. 
[17] Hubertus Franke, Peter Hochschild, Pratap Pattnaik, and Marc Snir. An 
efficient implementation of MPI. In 1994 International Conference on Parallel 
Processi ng, 1994. 
[18] G. A. Geist, M. T. Heath, B. W. Peyton, and P. H. Worley. A user’s guide to 
PICL: a portable instrumented communication library. Technical Report 
TM-11616, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, October 1990. 
[19] William D. Gropp and Barry Smith. Chameleon parallel programming 
tools users manual. Technical Report ANL-93/23, Argonne National Lab 
oratory, March 1993. 
[20] O. Kramer and H. Muhlenbein. Mapping strategies in message-based 
multiprocessor systems. Parallel Computing, 9:213-225, 1989. 
[21] ] nCUBE Corporation. nGUBE 2 Programmers Guide, r2.0, December 1990. 
[22] Parasoft Corporation, Pasadena, CA. Express Users Guide, version 3.2.5 
edition, 1992. 
[23] Paul Pierce. The NX/2 operating system. In Proceedings of tiae Third Con 
ference on H.vpercu.be Concurrent Compzeters and Application, pages 384-390. 
ACM Press, 1988. 
[24] A. Skjellum and A. Leung. Zipcode: a portable multicomputer communi 
cation library atop the reactive kernel. In D. W. Walker and Q. F. Stout, 
editors, Proceedings of the Fifth Distributed Memory Concurrent Computing Con 
ference, pages 767-776. IEEE Press, 1990. 
[25] A. Skjellum, S. Smith, C. Still, A. Leung, and M. Morari. The Zipcode 
message passing system. Technical report, Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory, September 1992. 

[26] Anthony Skjellum, Nathan E. Doss, and Purushotham V. Bangalore. Writ 
ing Libraries in MPI. In Anthony Skjellum and Donna S. Reese, editors, 
Proceedings of the Scalable Parallel Libraries Conference, pages 16G-1 &dquo;73. IEEE 
Computer Society Press, October 1993. 
[27] Anthony Skjellum, Steven G. Smith, Nathan E. Doss, Alvin P. Leung, and 

Manfred Morari. The Design and Evolution of Zipcode. Parallel Computing, 1994. (Invited Paper, to appear in Special Issue on Message Passing). [28] Anthony Skjellum, Steven G. Smith, Nathan E. Doss, Charles H. Still, Alvin P. Leung, and Manfred Morari. Zipcode: A Portable Communi cation Layer for High Performance Multicomputing. Technical Report UCRL-JC-106725 (revised 9/92, 12/93, 4/94), Lawrence Livermore Na

tional Laboratory, March 1991. To appear in Concurrency: Practice t~ Expe rience. [29] D. Walker. Standards for message passing in a distributed memory envi ronment. Technical Report TM-12147, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, August 1992.

ANNEX A

LANGUAGE BINDING

### A.1 Introduction In this section we summarize the specific bindings for both Fortran and C. We present first the C bindings, then the Fortran bindings. Listings are alphabetical within chapter.

A.2 Defined Constants for C and Fortran

These are required defined constants, to be denned in the files mpi.h (for C) and mpif. h (for Fortran).

| MPI_ERR_COUNT | | |
| --- | --- | --- |
| MPT ERR TYPE | | |
| MPI_ERR_TAG | | |
| MPI&dquo;.ERR_CDMM | | |
| MPI ERR RANK | | |

/* return codes (both C and Fortran) */ 
MPI_SUCCESS 
MPI_ERR_BUFFER 
MPI_ERR_COUNT 
MPT ERR TYPE 
MPI_ERR_TAG 
MPI&dquo;.ERR_CDMM 
MPI ERR RANK 
MPI_ERR_REQUEST 
MPI_ERR_ROOT 
MPI-ERR-GROUP 
MPI-ERR_GP 
MPI_ERR_TOPOLOGY 
MPI_ERR_DIMS 
MPI_ERR_ARG 
MPI_ERR_UNKHOWN 
MPI_ERR_TRUNCATE 
MPI_ERR_OTHER 
MPI_ERR_INTERN 
MPI_ERR_LASTCODE 

/* assorted constants (both C and Fortran) */

MPI_BOTTOM 
MPI_PROC_NULL 
MPI_ANY_SOURCE 
MPI_ANY_TAG 
MPI_UNDEFINED 
MPI_UB 
MPI_LB 
/* status size and reserved index values (Fortran) */ 
MPI_STATUS_SIZE 
MPI_SOURCE 
MPI_TAG 
/* Error-handling specifiers (C and Fortran) */ 
MPI-ERRORS-ARE-FATAL 
MPI_ERRORS_RETURN 

/* Maximum sizes for strings */ MPI_MAX_PROCESSOR_NAME MPI_MAX_ERROR_STRING

| MPI_LONG | | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| MPI_UNSIGNED_CHAR | | | | |
| MFI UNSIGNED SHDR,T | | | | |
| MPI_UNSIGNED | | | | |
| MPI_UNSIGNED_LONG | | | | |
| MPI_FLOAT | | | | |

/* elementary datatypes (C) */ 
MPI_CHAR 
MPI_SHORT 
MPI_INT 
MPI_DOUBLE 
MPI_LONG_DOUBLE 
MPI_BYTE 
MPI_PACKED 

/* elementary datatypes (Fortran) */ MPI_INTEGER

&dquo;

MPI_REAL 
MPI_DOUBLE_PRECISION 
MPI_COMPLEX 
MPI_DOUBLE_C1JMPLEX 

’

MPI_LOGICAL

°

MPI_CHARACTER

MPI_BYTE MPI_PACKED

/* datatypes for reduction functions (C) */

| MPI-FLOAT-INT | | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| MPI_DOUBLE_INT | | | | |
| MPI_LONG_INT | | | | |
| MPI_2INT | | | | |
| MPI-SHORT-INT | | | | |

MPI_LONG_DOUBLE_INT

/* datatypes for reduction functions (Fortran) */ 
MPI 2REAL 
MPI-2DOUBLE-PRECISION 
MPI_2INTEGER 

/* optional datatypes (Fortran) */

| MPI INTEGERi 1 | | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| MPI_INTEGER2 | | | | |
| MPI_INTEGER4 | | | | |
| MPI_REAL2 | | | | |
| MPI_REAL4 | | | | |
| MPI_REAL8 | | | | |

/* optional datatypes (C) */ MPI_LONG_LONG_INT

/* reserved communicators (C and Fortran) */ 
MPI _COMJ-C WORLD 
MPI_CflMM_SELF 

/* results of communicator and group comparisons */

MPT IDENT MPI--CONGRUENT MPI_SIMILAR MPI_UNEQUAL

/* environmental inquiry keys (C and Fortran) */ MPI_TAG_UB

MPI-10 MPI_HOST

/* collective operations (C and Fortran) */ 
MPI_MAX 
MPI_MIN 
MPI_SUM 
MPI_PROD 
MPI_MAXLOC 
MPI MINLOC 
MPI_BAND 
MPI B0R 
MPI-BXOR 
KPI-LAND 
MPI LOR 
MPI-LXOR 

| MPI_MAX | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| MPI_MIN | | | |
| MPI_SUM | | | |
| MPI_PROD | | | |
| MPI_MAXLOC | | | |
| MPI MINLOC | | | |
| MPI_BAND | | | |
| MPI B0R | | | |
| MPI-BXOR | | | |
| KPI-LAND | | | |
| MPI LOR | | | |
| MPI-LXOR | | | |

/* Null handles */ MPI-GROUP-NULL MPI_COMM_NULL MPI_DATATYPE_NULL MPI_REQUEST_NULL MPI_OP_NULL MPI_ERRHANDLER_NULL /* Empty group */ MPI_GROUP_EMPTY

/* topologies (C and Fortran) */ 
MPI-GRAPH 
MPI CART 

T&dquo;he following are defined C type definitions, also included in the file mpi . h.

/* opaque types (C) */ 
MPI_Aint 
MPI_Status 

/* handles to assorted structures (C) */ MPI_Group

MPI_Comm

MPI_Datatype MPI_Request

MPI-OP

/* prototypes for user-defined functions (C) */ typedef int MPI_Copy_function(MPI_Comm *oldcomm, *newcomm, int *keyval, void *extra_state)

typedef int MPI_Delete_function(MPI_Comm *comm, int *keyval,

void *extra_state)}

typedef void MPI_Handlez_function(MPI_Comm *, int *, ...); typedef void MPI_User_function( void *invec, void *inoutvec, int *len,

MPI_Datatype *datatype); For Fortran, here are examples of how each of the user-defined functions should be declared. The user-function argument to MPI-OP-CREATE should be declared like

this:

FUNCTION USER_FUNCTION( INVEC(*), INOUTVEC(*), LEN, TYPE) 
 INVEC(LEN), INOUTVEC(LEN) 
INTEGER LEN, TYPE 

The copy-function argument to MPI_KEYVAL-CREATE should be declared like this:

FUNCTION COFY_FUNCTION(OLDCOMM, KEYVAL, EXTRA_STATE, ATTRIBUTE_VAL_IN, ATTRIBUTE_VAL_OUT, FLAG) INTEGER OLDCOMM, KEYVAL, EXTRA_STATE, ATTRIBUTE_VAL_IN, ATTRIBUTE_VAL_OUT

LOGICAL FLAG

The delete-function argument to MPI-KEYVAL-CREATE should be declared like this:

FUNCTION DELETE_FUNCTION(COMM, KEYVAL, ATTRIBUTE_VAL, EXTRA_STATE) INTEGER COMM, KEYVAL, ATTRIBUTE_VAL, EXTRA_STATE

A.3 C Bindings for Point-to-Point Communication

These are presented here in the order of their appearance in the chapter. int MPI-Send(void* buf, int count, MPI~atatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI-comm comm) int MPI-Recv(void* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int source, int tag, MPI_Comm comm, MPI_Status *status) int MPI_Get_count(MPI_Status *status, MPI-Datatype datatype, int *count)

int MPI~send(void* buf, int count, MPI~atatype datatype, int dest,

int tag, MPI_Comm comm) int MPI-Ssend(void* buf, int count, MPI~atatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI-Comm comm)

int MPI-Rsend(void* buf, int count, MPI~atatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI-Comm comm) int MPI-Buffer-attach( void* buffer, int size) int XPI-Buffer-detach( void** buffer, int* size) int MPI-Isend(void* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI-Request *request)

int MPI-Ibsend(void* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI-Request *request)

int MPI_Issend(void* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI_Request *request) int MPI-Irsend(void* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI-Request *request) int MPI-Irecv(void* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int source, int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI-Request *request)

int MPI-Wait(MPIJ~equest *request, MPI_Status *status) int MPI_Test(MPIJRequest *request, int *flag, MPI-Status *status)

int MPIJRequest_free(MPIJRequest *request) _ int MPI-Waitany(int count, MPI_H.equest *array-of-requests, int *index, MPI-Status *status) int MPI_Testany(int count, MPI-Request *azray_of xequests, int *index, int *flag, MPI_Status *status)

int MPI_Waitall(int count, MPI-Request *array-of -requests, MPI-Status *array_of_statuses) int MPI_Testall(int count, MPI-Request *array-of-requests, int *flag, MPI_Status *array-of-statuses) int MPI_Waitsome(int incount, MPI-Request *array_ofsequests, int *outcount, int *array_of.indices, MPI-Status *array-of-statuses) int MPI-Testsome(int incount, MPI-Request *array .of-requests, int *outcount, int *array_of_indices, MPI-Status *array_of_statuses)

int MPI_Iprobe(int source, int tag, MPI-Comm comm, int *flag, MPI-Status *status)

int MPI-Probe(int source, int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI-Status *status)

int MPI_Cancel(MPI_Request *request)

int MPI_Test_cancelled(MPI_Status *status, int *flag) int MPI_Send_init(void* buf, int count, MPI~atatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI_Comm comm, MPI-Request *request)

int MPI-Bsend-init (void* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI_R,equest *request)

int MPI-Ssend-init(void* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI-Request *request)

int MPI-Rsend-init(void* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int dest,

int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI~i,equest *request) int MPI~i.ecv_init(void* buf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, int source, int tag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI~i,equest *request) int MPI-Start(MPI-Request *request) int MPI_Startall(int count, MPI-Request *array_of~equests) int MPI-Sendrecv(void *sendbuf, int sendcount, MPI-Datatype sendtype, int dest, int sendtag, void *recvbuf, int recvcount, MPI._Datatype recvtype, int source, MPI-Datatype recvtag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI-Status *status) int MPI_Sendrecvxeplace(void* buf, int count, MPI~atatype datatype, int dest, int sendtag, int source, int recvtag, MPI-Comm comm, MPI-Status *status) int MPI_Type_contiguous(int count, MPI~atatype oldtype, MPI-Datatype *newtype)

int MPI-Type-vector(int count, int blocklength, int stride,

MPI-Datatype oldtype, MPI~atatype *newtype)

int MPI_Type-hvector(int count, int blocklength, MPI-Aint stride,

MPIJDatatype oldtype, MPI-Datatype *newtype)

int MPI_Type-indexed(int count, int *array-of-blocklengths, int *array_of_displacements, MPI~atatype oldtype, MPI~atatype *newtype)

int MPI-Type-hindexed(int count, int *array-of-blocklengths,

MPI-Aint *array_of_displacements, MPI~atatype oldtype, MPI~atatypa *newtype)

int MPI-Type-struct(int count, int *array_of_blocklengths,

MPI-Aint *array_of_displacements, MPI~atatype *array-of-types, MPIJDatatype *newtype)

int MPI-Address(void* location, MPI-Aint *address)

int MPI_Type_extent(MPT~3atatype datatype, int MPI-Aint *extent) int MPI-Type-size(MPI-Datatype datatype, int MPI-Aint*size) int MPI_Type_count{MPI~atatype datatype, int *count)

int MPI~Type.lb(MPIJDatatype datatype, int* MPI-Aint displacement) int MPI-Type-ub(MPI-Datatype datatype, int* MPI_Aint displacement) int MPI-Type-commit(MPI-Datatype *datatype) int MPI-Type-free(MPI-Datatype *datatype) int MPI_Get_elements(MPI_Status *status, MPI-Datatype datatype, int *count) int MPI-Pack(void* inbuf, int incount, MPI-Datatype datatype, void *outbuf, int outsize, int *position, MPI-Comm comm) int MPI-Unpack(void* inbuf, int insize, int *position, void *outbuf,

int outcount, MPI-Datatype datatype, MPI-Comm comm)

int MPI_Pack-size(int incount, MPI~atatype datatype, MPI-Comm comm,

int *size)

A.4 C Bindings for Collective Communication

int MPI-Barrier(MPI-Comm comm ) 
int MPI-Bcast(void* buffer, int count, MPI~atatype datatype, int root, 
MPI-Comm comm ) 

int MPI_Gather(void* sendbuf, int sendcount, MPI~atatype sendtype, void* recvbuf, int recvcount, MPIJDatatype recvtype, int root, MPI-Comm comm)

int MPI_Gatherv(vaid* sendbuf, int sendcount, MPI~atatype sendtype, void* recvbuf, int *recvcounts, int *displs, MPI~atatype recvtype, int root, MPI-Comm comm)

int MPI_Scatter(void* sendbuf, int sendcount, MPI~atatype sendtype, void* recvbuf, int recvcount, MPI~atatype recvtype, int root, MPI_Comm comm)

int MPI-Scatterv(void* sendbuf, int *sendcounts, int *displs, MPI~atatype sendtype, void* recvbuf, int recvcount, MPI-Datatype recvtype, int root, MPI-Comm comm)

int MPI_Allgather(void* sendbuf, int sendcount, MPI-Datatype sendtype, void* recvbuf, int recvcount, MPI-Datatype recvtype, MPI-Comm comm) int MPI_Allgatherv(void* sendbuf, int sendcount, MPI-Datatype sendtype, void* recvbuf, int *recvcounts, int *displs,

MPI-Datatype recvtype, MPI-Comm comm)

int MPI_Alltoall(void* sendbuf, int sendcount, MPI-Datatype sendtype, void* recvbuf, int recvcount, MPIJDatatype recvtype, MPI-Comm comm)

int MPI-Alltoallv(void* sendbuf, int *sendcounts, int *sdispls, 
MPI~.?atatype sendtype, void* recvbuf, int *recvcounts, 
int *rdispls, MPI~atatype recvtype, MPI_Connm comm) 
int MPI-Reduce(void* sendbuf, void* recvbuf, int count, 
MPI-Datatype datatype, MPI_Op op, int root, MPI-Comm comm) 

int MPI_Dp_create(MPI_User_function *function, int commute, MPI-Op *op)

int MPI-0pdree( MPI_Op *op)

int MPI-Allreduce(void* sendbuf, void* recvbuf, int count, 
MFI~atatype datatype, MPI-OP op, MPI-Comm comm) 
int MPI~?,educe_scatter(void* sendbuf, void* recvbuf, int *recvcounts, 
MPI~atatype datatype, MPI-OP op, MPI-Comm comm) 

int MPI-Scan(void* sendbuf, void* recvbuf, int count, MPI-Datatype datatype, MPI-OP op, MPI-Comm comm )

A.5 C Bindings for Groups, Contexts, and Communicators

int MPI -Group-size (MPI -Group group, int *size) int MPI_Group_rank(MPI_Group group, int *rank)

int MPI-Group-translate_ranks (MPI_Group groupl, int n, int *ranksl, MPI-Group group2, int *ranks2) int MPI_Group_compare(MPI_Group groupl,MPI_Group group2, int *result)

int MPI_Comm_group(MPI_Comm comm, MPI-Group *group) int MPI_Group_union(MPI_Group groupl, MPI-Group group2, MPI-Group *newgroup)

int MPI_Group_intersection(MPI_Group groupl, MPI-Group group2,

MPI-Group *newgroup)

int MPI_Group_difference(MPI_Graup groupl, MPI_Group group2, MPI-Group *newgroup)

int MPI_Group_ancl(MPI_Group group, int n, int *ranks, MPI-Group *newgroup) int MFI_Group_excl(MPI_Group group, int n, int *ranks, MPI-Group *newgroup) int MPI_Group_range_incl(MPI_Group group, int n, int ranges [] [3] , ,.

MPI-Group *newgroup)

’

int MPI_Group_range_excl(MPI_Group group, int n, int ranges[] [3] ,

MPI-Group *newgroup) int MFI_Group_fzee(MPI_Group *group)

int MPI_Comm_size(MPT_Comm comm, int *size)

int MP I -Comm-rank (MP I -Comm comm, int *rank) int MPI_Comm_compare(MPI_Comm comml, comm2, int *result) int MPI_Comm_dup(MPI_Comm comm, MPI-Comm *newcomm) int MPI_Comm_create(MPI_Comm comm, MPI-Group group, MPI-Comm *newcomm)

int MPI_Comm_split(MPI_Comm comm, int color, int key, MPI-Comm *newcomm)

int MPI_Comm_free(MPI_Comm *comm)

int MPI_Comm_test_inter(MPI_Comm comm, int *fl~ag) int MPI_Comm_remate_size(MPI_Camm comm, int *size)

int MPI -Comm-remot e -group (MPI -Comm comm, MPI_Group *group)

int MPI_Intercomm_create(MPI_Comm local_comm, int local-leader, ’ MPI_Comm peer_comm, int remote-leader, int tag, MPI-Comm *newintercomm) int MPI_Intercomm_merge(MPI_Comm intercomm, int high, MPI-Comm *newintracomm) int MPI_Keyval_createCMPI_Copy-1unction *copy-fn, MPIJDelete-function *delete-fn, int *keyval, void* extra-state)

int MPI-Keyval-free(int *keyval)

int MPI-Attr-put(MPI-Comm comm, int keyval, void* attribute-val) int MFIJIttr_get(MPI_Comm comm, int keyval, void **attribute_val, int *flag) int MP I -Attr-delete (MPI -Comm comm, int keyval)

A.6 C Bindings for Process Topologies int MPI_Cart_create(MPI_Comm comm_old, int ndims, int *dims, int *periods, int reorder, MPI_Comm *comm-cart) int MPI-Dims-create(int nnodes, int ndims, int *dims) int MPI_Graph_create(MPI_Comm comm_old, int nnodes, int *index, int *edges,

int reorder, MPI-Comm *comm-graph)

int MPI_Topo_test(MPI_Comm comm, int *status) , int MPI -Graphdims -get (MP I -Comm comm, int *nnodes, int *nedges) int MP I-Graph-get (MPI -Comm comm, int maxindex, int maxedges, int *index,

int *edges)

int MPI_Cartdim_get(MPI_Comm comm, int *ndims) int MPI_Cart_get(MPI_Comm comm, int maxdims, int *dims, int *periods, int *coords)

int MPI_Cart_rank(MPI_Comm comm, int *coords, int *rank) int MPI_Cart_coords(MPI_Comm comm, int rank, int maxdims, int *coords)

int MPI -Graph-neighbors -count (MPI-Comm comm, int rank, int *nneighbors) int MPI -Graph-ne ighbors (MPI -Comm comm, int rank, int maxneighbors,

int *neighbors)

int MPI_Cart_shift(MPI_Comm comm, int direction, int disp, int *rank-source, int *rank-dest) .

int MP3_Cart_sub(MPI_Comm comm, int *remain-dims, MPI-Comm *newcomm)

int MPI -Cart -map (MPI -Comm comm, int ndims, int *dims, int *periods, int *newrank)

int MP I -Graph-map (MPI -Comm comm, int nnodes, int *index, int *edges, int *newrank)

A.7 C Bindings for Environmental Inquiry int MPI-Get-processor-name (char *name, int *resultlen) int MPI-Errhandler-create(MPI-Handler-f unction *function, MPI-Errhandler *errhandler)

int MPI_Errhandler_set(MPI_Comm comm, MPI~’rrhandler errhandler) int MPlJErrhandler_getCMPI_Comm comm, MPI~rrhandler *errhandler)

int MPI-Errhandler-free(MPI-Errhandler *errhandler)

int MPI~rror_string(int errorcode, char *string, int *resultlen)

int MPI-Error_class(int errorcode, int *errorclass)

int double MPI-Wtime(void)

int double MPI-Wtick(void)

int MPI_Init(int *argc, char ***argv) int MPI-Finalize(void)

int MPI_Initialized(int *flag)

int MPI_Abort(MPI_Comm comm, int errorcode)

A.8 C Bindings for Profiling int MPI_Pcontrol(const int level, ...)

A.9 Fortran Bindings for Point-to-Point Communication 
MPI_SEND(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, IERROR) 
 BUF(*) 
INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, IERROR 

MPI-RECV(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, SOURCE, TAG, COMM, STATUS, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, SOURCE, TAG, COMM, STATUS(MPI_STATUS_SIZE),

IERROR

MPI_GET_COUNT(STATUS, DATATYPE, COUNT, IERROR) INTEGER STATUS(MPI_STATUS_SIZE), DATATYPE, COUNT, IERROR

MPIJBSEND(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, IERROR

MPI-SSEND(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, IERROR

MPI-RSEND(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, IERROR

MPI~UFFER~TTACH( BUFFER, SIZE, IERROR) BUFFER(*)

INTEGER SIZE, IERROR

MPI~UFFER~ETACH( BUFFER, SIZE, IERROR) BUFFER(*) INTEGER SIZE, IERROR

MPI-ISEND(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR

MPI_IBSEND(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR

MPI_ISSEND(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR

MPI-IRSEND(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR

MPI-IRECV(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, SOURCE, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, SOURCE, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR

MPI-WAIT(REQUEST, STATUS, IERROR) INTEGER REQUEST, STATUS(MPI_STATUS_SIZE), IERROR

MPI-TEST(REQUEST, FLAG, STATUS, IERROR)

LOGICAL FLAG

INTEGER REQUEST, STATUS (MPI~STATUS_SIZE), IERROR

MPIJREQUEST-FREECREQUEST, IERRDR) INTEGER REQUEST, IERROR

MPT_WAITANY(CDUNT, ARRAY-OF-REQUESTS, INDEX, STATUS, IERROR)

INTEGER COUNT, ARRAY-OF -REQUESTS(*), INDEX, STATUS (MPI-STATUS-SIZE),

IERROR

MPI-TESTANY (COUNT, ARRAY-OFJtEQUESTS, INDEX, FLAG, STATUS, IERROR)

LOGICAL FLAG

INTEGER COUNT, ARRAY_DF_.REQUESTS(*), INDEX, STATUS(MFI_STATUS_SIZE),

IERROR

MPI_WAITALL(COUNT, ARRAY-OF -REQUESTS, ARRAY_OF_STATUSES, IERROR) INTEGER COUNT, ARRAY.OFJ~EQUESTS(~), ARRAY_OF_STATUSES(MPI_STATUS_SIZE,*), IERROR

MPI_TESTALL(COUNT, ARRAY .OF J~EQUESTS, FLAG, ARRAY_OF_STATUSES, IERROR)

LOGICAL FLAG

INTEGER COUNT, ARRAY_OFJ~EQUESTS(*), ARRAY J]FJ3TATUSES(MPI.STATUS-SIZE,*), IERROR -

MPI_WAITSOME(INCOUNT, ARRAY_OF_REQUESTS, OUTCOUNT, ARRAY-OF-INDICES, ARRAY_OF_STATUSES, IERROR) INTEGER INCOUNT, ARRAY-OFJ~EQUESTS(*), OUTCOUNT, ARRAY-OF-INDICES(*), ARRAY_OF_STATUSES(MPI_STATUS_SIZE,*), IERROR

MPI_TESTSOME(INCOUNT, ARRAY.OF.REQUESTS, OUTCOUNT, ARRAY_OF_INDICES, ARRAY_OF_STATUSES, IERROR) INTEGER INCOUNT, ARRAY_OF_REQUESTS(*), OUTCOUNT, ARRAY_OF_INDICES(*), ARRAY-0F-STATUSES(MPI-STATUS-SIZE,*) , IERROR

MPI-IPROBE(SOURCE, TAG, COMM, FLAG, STATUS, IERROR)

LOGICAL FLAG

INTEGER SOURCE, TAG, COMM, STATUS (MPI-STATUS-SIZE), IERROR

MPI-PROBE(SOURCE, TAG, COMM, STATUS, IERROR) INTEGER SOURCE, TAG, COMM, STATUS(MPI_STATUS_SIZE), IERROR

MPI-CANCEL(REQUEST, IERROR) INTEGER REQUEST, IERROR

MPI_TEST_CANCELLED(STATUS, FLAG, IERROR)

LOGICAL FLAG

INTEGER STATUS (MPI-STATUS-SIZE), IERROR

MPI-SEND-INIT(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER REQUEST, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR

MPI_BSEND_INIT(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER REQUEST, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR

MPI-SSEND-INIT(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR

MPI-RSEND-INIT(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR

MPI~ECY_INIT(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, SOURCE, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, SOURCE, TAG, COMM, REQUEST, IERROR

MPI-START(REQUEST, IERROR)

INTEGER REQUEST, IERROR

MPI_STARTALL(COUNT, ARRAY-0F-REQUESTS, IERROR) INTEGER COUNT, ARRAY-0F-REQUESTS(*), IERROR

MPI-SENDRECV(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, DEST, SENDTAG, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, SOURCE, RECVTAG, COMM, STATUS, IERROR) SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) INTEGER SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, DEST, SENDTAG, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, SOURCE, RECVTAG, COMM, STATUS (MPI_STATUS-5IZE), IERROR

MPI~ENDRECV~i,EPLACE(BUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, SENDTAG, SOURCE, RECVTAG, COMM, STATUS, IERROR) BUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, DEST, SENDTAG, SOURCE, RECVTAG, COMM, STATUS(MPI_STATUS_SIZE), IERROR

MPZ_TYPE_CONTIGUDUS(COUNT, OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR) INTEGER COUNT, OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR

MPI-TYPE-VECTOR (COUNT, BLOCKLENGTH, STRIDE, OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR) INTEGER COUNT, BLOCKLENGTH, STRIDE, OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR

MPI_TYPE~HVECTOR(COUNT, BLOCKLENGTH, STRIDE, OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR) INTEGER COUNT, BLOCKLENGTH, STRIDE, OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR

MPI_TYPE_INDEXED(COUNT, ARRAY-0F-BLOCKLENGTHS, ARRAY_DF~ISPLACEMENTS, OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR) INTEGER COUNT, ARRAY_DF~LOCKLENGTHS(*), ARRAY-0F-DISPLACEXENTS(*), OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR

MPIJTYPEJHINDEXED (COUNT, ARRAY_OF_BLOCKLENGTHS, ARRAY-OF-DISPLACEMENTS, OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR) INTEGER COUNT, ARRAY-OF-BLOCKLENGTHS(*), ARRAY-OF-DISPLACEXENTS(*), OLDTYPE, NEWTYPE, IERROR

XPI-TYPE-STRUCT(COUNT, ARRAY_OF~LOCKLENGTHS, ARRAY_OF~ISPLACEMENTS, ARRAY-OF-TYPES, NEWTYPE, IERROR) INTEGER COUNT, ARRAY~OF.BLQCKLENGTHS(*), ARRAY-QF-DISPLACEMENTS(*), ARRAY.OF.TYPES (* ) , NEWTYPE, IERROR

MPI-ADDRESS(LOCATIDN, ADDRESS, IERROR) LOCATION(*) INTEGER ADDRESS, IERROR

MPI_TYPE-EXTENT(DATATYPE. EXTENT, IERROR) INTEGER DATATYPE, EXTENT, IERROR

MPI_TYPE_SIZE(DATATYPE, SIZE, IERROR)

INTEGER DATATYPE, SIZE, IERROR

MPI_T~tPE_COUNT{DATATYPE, COUNT, IERROR) INTEGER DATATYPE, COUNT, IERROR

MPI-TYPE-LB( DATATYPE, DISPLACEMENT, IERROR) INTEGER DATATYPE, DISPLACEMENT, IERROR

MPI-TYPE-UB( DATATYPE, DISPLACEMENT, IERROR) INTEGER DATATYPE, DISPLACEMENT, IERROR

MPI_TYPE-COMMIT(DATATYPE, IERROR)

INTEGER DATATYPE, IERROR

MPI.TYPE.FREE (DATATYPE, IERROR)

INTEGER DATATYPE, IERROR

MP I -GET -ELEMENTS (STATUS, DATATYPE, COUNT, IERROR) INTEGER STATUS (MPI -STATUS -SIZE), DATATYPE, COUNT, IERROR

MPI_PACK(INBUF, INCOUNT, DATATYPE, OUTBUF, OUTSIZE, POSITION, COMM, IERROR) INBUF(*), OUTBUF(*) INTEGER INCOUNT, DATATYPE, OUTSIZE, POSITION, COMM, IERROR

MPI_UNPACK{INBUF, INSIZE, POSITION, OUTBUF, OUTSIZE, DATATYPE, COMM, IERROR) INBUF(*), OUTBUF(*) INTEGER INSIZE, POSITION, OUTCOUNT, DATATYPE, COMM, IERROR

MPI-PACK-SIZE( INCOUNT, DATATYPE, COMM, SIZE, IERROR) INTEGER INCOUNT, DATATYPE, COMM, SIZE, IERROR

A.10 Fortran Bindings for Collective Communication 
~MPZ BARRIER(coMM, IERROR) 
INTEGER COMM, IERROR 

MPI-BCAST(BUFFER, COUNT, DATATYPE, ROOT, COMM, IERROR) BUFFER(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, ROOT, COMM, IERROR

MPI_GATHER(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, ROOT, COMM, IERROR) SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) INTEGER SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, ROOT, COMM, IERROR

MPI_GATHERV(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNTS, DISPLS, RECVTYPE, ROOT, COMM, IERROR) SENDBUF(*) , RECVBUF(*)

INTEGER SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVCOUNTS(*), DISPLS(*), RECVTYPE, ROOT,

COMM, IERROR

MPI-SCATTER(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, ROOT, COMM, IERROR) SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) INTEGER SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, ROOT, COMM, IERROR

MPI-SCATTERV(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNTS, DISPLS, SENDTYPE, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, ROOT, COMM, IERROR) SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) INTEGER SENDCOUNTS(*), DISPLS(*), SENDTYPE, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, ROOT,

COMM, IERROR

MPI~4.LLGATHER(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, COMM, IERROR) SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) INTEGER SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, COMM, IERROR

MPI-ALLGATHF-RV(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNTS, DISPLS, RECVTYPE, COMM, IERROR) SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) INTEGER SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVCOUNTS(*), DISPLS(*), RECVTYPE, COMM, IERROR

MPI-ALLTOALL(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, COMM, IERROR) SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) INTEGER SENDCOUNT, SENDTYPE, RECVCOUNT, RECVTYPE, COMM, IERROR

MPI-ALLTOALLV(SENDBUF, SENDCOUNTS, SDISPLS, SENDTYPE, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNTS, RDISPLS, RECVTYPE, COMM, IERROR) SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) INTEGER SENDCOUNTS(*), SDISPLS(*), SENDTYPE, RECVCOUNTS(*), RDISPLS(*), RECVTYPE, COMM, IERROR

MPI_REDLTCE(SENDBUF, RECVBUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, OP, ROOT, CDMM, IERROR) SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, OP, ROOT, COMM, IERROR

MPI-DP-CREATE( FUNCTION, COMMUTE, OP, IERROR)

EXTERNAL FUNCTION LOGICAL COMMUTE INTEGER OP, IERROR

MPI-OP-FREE( OP, IERROR) INTEGER OP, IERROR

MPI-ALLREDUCE(SENDBUF, RECVBUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, OP, COMM, IERROR) SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, OP, COMM, IERROR

MPI~i.E~?UCE_SCATTER(SENDBUF, RECVBUF, RECVCOUNTS, DATATYPE, OP, COMM, IERROR) SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) INTEGER RECVCOUNTS(*), DATATYPE, OP, COMM, IERROR

MPI-SCAN(SENDBUF, RECVBUF, COUNT, DATATYPE, OP, COMM, IERROR) SENDBUF(*), RECVBUF(*) INTEGER COUNT, DATATYPE, OP, COMM, IERROR

A.11 Fortran Bindings for Groups, Contexts, etc. 
MPI-GROUP-SIZE(GROUP, SIZE, IERROR) 
INTEGER GROUP, SIZE, IERROR 

MPT_GROUP~i’.ANK(GROUP, RANK, IERROR) INTEGER GROUP, RANK, IERROR

MPI -GROUP -TRANSLATE-RANKS (GROUP 1, N, RANKS1, GROUP2, RANKS2, IERROR) INTEGER GROUP1, N, RANKS1(*), GROUP2, RANKS2(*), IERROR

MPI_GROUP~COMPARE(GROUP1, GROUP2, RESULT, IERROR) INTEGER GROUP1, GROUP2, RESULT, IERROR

MPI_COMM_GROUP, CCOMM GROUP, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, GROUP, IERROR

MPLGROUP _UNION (GROUP 1 , GROUP2, NEWGROUP, IERROR) INTEGER GROUP1, GROUP2, NEWGROUP, IERROR

MPI -GROUP -INTERSECT ION (GROUP 1 , GROUP2, NEWGROUP, IERROR) INTEGER GROUP1, GROUP2, NEWGROUP, IERROR

MPI_GROUP-DIFFERENCE(GROUP1, GROUP2, NEWGROUP, IERROR) INTEGER GROUP1, GROUP2, NEWGROUP, IERROR

’

MPI_GROUP_INCL(GROUP, N, RANKS, NEWGROUP, IERROR) INTEGER GROUP, N, RANKS(*), NEWGROUP, IERROR

MPI_GROUP’_EXGL(GROUP, N, RANKS, NEWGROUP, IERROR) INTEGER GROUP, N, RANKS(*), NEWGROUP, IERROR

MP I -GROUP -RANGE - INCL (GROUP, N, RANGES, NEWGROUP, IERROR) INTEGER GROUP, N, RANGES(3,*), NEWGROUP, IERROR

MP I -GROUP -RANGE -EXCL (GROUP, N, RANGES, NEWGROUP, IERROR) INTEGER GROUP, N, RANGES(3,*), NEWGROUP, IERROR

MPI-GROUP~FREE(GROUP, IERROR) INTEGER GROUP, IERROR

’

MPI_COMM_SIZE(COM~I, SIZE, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, SIZE, IERROR

MPI-COMM-RANK (COMM, RANK, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, RANK, IERROR

MPI_COMM_COMPARE(COMM1, COMM2, RESULT, IERROR) INTEGER COMM1, COMM2, RESULT, IERROR

MPI-COMM-DUP (COMM, NEWCOMM, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, NEWCOMM, IERROR

MPI_COMM_CREATE(COMM, GROUP, NEWCOMM, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, GROUP, NEWCOMM, IERROR

MPI_COMM_SPLIT(CDMM, COLOR, KEY, NEWCOMM, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, COLOR, KEY, NEWCOMM, IERROR

MPi_COMM_FREE(COMM, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, IERROR

MPI_COMM_TEST_INTER(COMM, FLAG, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, IERROR LOGICAL FLAG

MPI-COMM-REMOTE-SIZE (COMM, SIZE, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, SIZE, IERROR

MPI_COMMJREMOTE-GROUP(COMM, GROUP, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, GROUP, IERROR

MPI-INTERCOMM -CREATE (LOCAL -COMM, LOCAL_LEADER, PEER-COMM, REMOTE-LEADER, TAG, NEWINTERCOMM, IERROR) INTEGER LOCAL COMM, LOCAL1.EADER~ PEER.~.CQMM, REMOTE-LEADER, TAG, NEWINTERCOMM, IERROR

MPI-INTERCDMM-MERGE(INTERCOMM, HIGH, INTRACOMM, IERROR) INTEGER INTERCOMM, INTRACOMM, IERROR

LOGICAL HIGH

MPI -KEYVAL -CREATE (COPY-FN, DELETE-FN, KEYVAL, EXTRA-STATE, IERROR) EXTERNAL COPY-FN, DELETE-FN INTEGER KEYVAL, EXTRA-STATE, IERROR

MPI -KEYVAL -FREE (KEYVAL, IERROR) INTEGER KEYVAL, IERROR

MPI~TTR.~’UT(CDMM, KEYVAL, ATTRIBUTE-VAL, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, KEYVAL, ATTRIBUTE-VAL, IERROR

MPI_ATTR_GET(COMM, KEYVAL, ATTRIBT1‘TE_VAL, FLAG, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, KEYVAL, ATTRIBUTE-VAL, IERROR

LOGICAL FLAG

MPI-ATTR-DELETE (COMM, KEYVAL, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, KEYVAL, IERROR

##### A.12 Fortran Bindings for Process Topologies

MPI-CART-CREATE(COMM-OLD, NDIMS, DIMS, PERIODS, REORDER, COMM-CART, IERROR) INTEGER COMM_DLD, NDIMS, DIMS(*), CDMM-CART, IERROR LOGICAL PERIODS(*), REORDER

MPIJ3IMS-CREATE (NNODES, NDIMS, DIMS, IERROR) INTEGER NNODES, NDIMS, DIMS(*), IERROR

MPI-GRAPH-CREATE(COMM-OLD, NNODES, INDEX, EDGES, REORDER, COMM-GRAPH, IERROR) INTEGER COMM-OLD, NNODES, INDEX(*), EDGES(*), COMM-GRAPH, IERROR

LOGICAL REORDER

MPI_TOPO_TEST(COMM, STATUS, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, STATUS, IERROR

MPI_GRAFHDIMS_GET(COMM, NNODES, NEDGES, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, NNODES, NEDGES, IERROR

KPI-GRAPH-GET (COMM, MAXINDEX, MAXEDGES, INDEX, EDGES, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, MAXINDEX, MAXEDGES, INDEX(*), EDGES(*), IERROR

MPI_CARTDIM_GET(CDMM, NDIMS, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, NDIMS, IERROR

MPI_CART_GET(CDMM, MAXDIMS, DIMS, PERIODS, COORDS, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, MAXDIMS, DIMS(*), COORDS(*), IERROR LOGICAL PERIODS(*)

MPI_CART_RANK(COMM, COORDS, RANK, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, COORDS(*), RANK, IERROR

MPI_CART_COORDS(CDMM, RANK, MAXDIMS, COORDS, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, RANK, MAXDIMS, COORDS(*), IERROR

MPI_GRAPH_NEIGHBORS_COUNT(COMM, RANK, NNEIGHBORS, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, RANK, NNEIGHBORS, IERROR

MPI-GRAPH-MEIGHBORS(COMM, RANK, MAXNEIGHBORS, NEIGHBORS, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, RANK, MAXNEIGHBORS, NEIGHBORS(*), IERROR

MPI_CART_SHIFT(CDMM, DIRECTION, DISP, RANK-SOURCE, RANK-DEST, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, DIRECTION, DISP, RANK-SOURCE, RANK-DEST, IERROR

MPI_CART_SUB(COMM, REMAIN-DIMS, NEWCOMM, IERRDR) INTEGER COMM, NEWCOMM, IERROR LOGICAL REMAIN-DIMS (*)

MPI_CART~IAP(COMM, NDIMS, DIMS, PERIODS, NEWRANK, IERROR)

INTEGER COMM, NDIMS, DIMS(*), NEWRANK, IERROR

LOGICAL PERIODS(*)

MPI-GRAPH-MAP(COMM, NNODES, INDEX, EDGES, NEWRANK, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, NNODES, INDEX(*), EDGES(*), NEWR.ANK, IERROR

#### A.13 Fortran Bindings for Environmental Inquiry

MPI_GET_PRDCESSOR_NAME(NAME, RESULTLEN, IERRDR) CHARACTER*(*) NAME INTEGER RESULTLEN, IERROR

MPI-ERRHANDLER-CREATE (FUNCTION, HANDLER, IERROR)

EXTERNAL FUNCTION

INTEGER ERRHANDLER, IERROR

MPI-ERRHANDLER-SET (COMM, ERRHANDLER, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, ERRHANDLER, IERROR

MPI-ERRHANDLER-GET (COMM, ERRHANDLER, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, ERRHANDLER, IERROR

MPI-ERRHANDLER-FREE(ERRRANDLER, IERROR) INTEGER ERRHANDLER, IERROR

MPI~RRDR_STRING(ERRORCODE, STRING, RESULTLEN, IERROR) INTEGER ERRORCODE, RESULTLEN, IERROR CHARACTER*(*) STRING

MPI-ERROR-CLASS (ERRORCODE, ERRORCLASS, IERROR) INTEGER ERRORCODE, ERR.DRCLASS, IERROR

DOUBLE PRECISION MPI_WTZME()

DOUBLE PRECISION MPI_WTICK() MPI_INIT(IERROR)

INTEGER IERRDR

MPI-FINALIZE(IERROR)

INTEGER IERROR

MPI-INITIALIZED(FLAG, IERROR)

LOGICAL FLAG INTEGER IERROR

MPI~BORT(COMM, ERRORCODE, IERROR) INTEGER COMM, ERRORCODE, IERROR

##### A.14 Fortran Bindings for Profiling

MPI~CONTROL(level) INTEGER LEVEL, ...

