Articles

## DATA PARALLEL ALGORITHMS

Parallel computers with tens of thousands of processors are typically programmed in a data parallel style, as opposed to the control parallel style used in multiprocessing. The success of data parallel algorithms-even on problems that at first glance seem inherently serial-suggests that this style of programming has much wider applicability than was previously thought.

W. DANIEL HILLIS and GUY L. STEELE, JR.

In this article we describe a series of algorithms ap propriate for fine-grained parallel computers with general communications. We call these algorithms data parallel algorithms because their parallelism comes from simultaneous operations across large sets of data, rather than from multiple threads of control. The intent is not so much to present new algorithms (most have been described earlier in other contexts), but rather to demonstrate a style of programming that is appropriate for a machine with tens of thousands or even millions of processors. The algorithms described all use O(N) processors to solve problems of size N, typically in O(log N) time. Some of the examples solve problems that at first sight seem inherently serial, such as parsing strings and finding the end of a linked list. In many cases, we include actual run times measured on the 65,536processor Connection Machine*’ system. A key fea ture of this hardware is a general-purpose communi cations network connecting the processors that frees the programmer from detailed concerns of the map ping between data and hardware.

MODEL OF THE MACHINE Our model of a fine-grained parallel machine with general-purpose communication is based on the

Connection Machine is a registered trademark of Thinking Machines 
Corporation. 
0 1966 ACM OOOl-0782/~S/lZOO-1170 750 

Connection Machine system [14]. Current Connec tion Machine systems have either 16,384 or 65,536 processors, each with 4,096 bits of memory. There is nothing special about these particular numbers, other than being powers of two, but they are indica tive of the scale of the machine. (The model is more sensible with thousands rather than tens of proces sors.) The system has two parts: a front-end com puter of the usual von Neumann style, and an array of Connection Machine processors. Each processor in the array has a small amount of local memory, and to the front end, the processor array looks like a memory. A typical front-end processor is a VAX@ or a Symbolics 36OOe. The processor array is connected to the memory bus of the front end so that the local processor mem ories can be random accessed directly by the front end, one word at a time, just as if it were any other memory. This section of the memory on the front end, however, is “smart” in the sense that the front end can issue special commands that cause many parts of the memory to be operated upon simultane ously, or cause data to move around within the memory. The processor array therefore effectively extends the instruction set of the front-end processor to include instructions that operate on large

VAX is a trademark of Digital Equipment Corporation. 
Symbolics 3600 is a trademark of Symbol&, Inc. 

amounts of data simultaneously. In this way, the processor array serves a function similar to a floating-point accelerator unit, except that it accel erates general parallel computation and not just floating-point arithmetic. The control structure of a program running on a Connection Machine system is executed by the front end in the usual way. An important practical bene fit of this approach is that the program is developed and executed within the already-familiar program ming environment of the front end. The program can perform computations in the usual serial way on the front end and also issue commands to the processor array. The processor array executes commands in SIMD fashion. There is a single instruction stream coming from the front end; these instructions act on multi ple data items, on the order of one (or a few) per processor. Most instructions are executed condition ally: That is, each processor has state bits that deter mine which instructions the processor will execute. A processor whose state bit is set is said to be selected. The state bit is called the confext flag be cause the set of selected processors is often referred to as the context within which instructions are exe cuted. For example, the front end might arrange for all odd-numbered processors to have their context flags set, and even-numbered processors to have their context flags cleared; issuing an ADD instruc tion would then cause each of the selected proces sors (the odd-numbered ones) to add one word of local memory into another word. The deselected (even-numbered) processors would do nothing, and their local memories would remain unchanged. Contexts may be saved in memory and later re stored, with each processor saving or restoring its own bit in parallel with the others. There are a few instructions that are unconditional: They are exe cuted by every processor regardless of the value of the context flag. Such instructions are required for saving and restoring contexts. A context, or a set of values for all the context flags, represents a set: namely, a set of selected pro cessors. Forming the intersection, union, or comple ment of such sets is simple and fast; it requires only a one-bit logical AND, OR, or NOT operation issued to the processors. Locally viewed, each processor performs just one logical operation on one or two single-bit operands: viewed globally, an operation on sets is performed. (On the current Connection Ma chine hardware, such an operation takes about a microsecond.) The processors can individually perform all the usual operations on logical, integer, and floating

point operands: add, subtract, multiply, divide, com pare, max, min, not, and, or, exclusive or, shift, square root, and so on. In addition, single values computed in the front end can be broadcast from the front end to all processors at once (essentially by including them as immediate data in the instruction stream). A number of other computing systems have been constructed with the characteristics we have already described, namely, a large number of parallel proc essors, each of which has local memory and the abil ity to execute instructions of more or less the usual sort, as broadcast from a master controller. These include ILLIAC IV [8], the Goodyear MPP [3], the Non-Von [23]; and the ICL DAP [12]; among others [13]. There are two additional characteristics of the Connection Machine programming model, however, which distinguish it from these other systems: gen eral, pointer-based communication, and virtual proces SOYS.

Previous parallel computing systems of this fine grained SIMD style have restricted interprocessor communication to certain patterns wired into the hardware; typically this pattern is a two-dimensional rectangular grid, or a tree. The Connection Machine model allows any processor to communicate directly with any other processor in unit time, while other processors also communicate concurrently. Commu nication is implemented via a SEND instruction. Within each processor, the SEND instruction takes two operands: One addresses-within the processor-the field that contains the data to be sent; the other addresses a processor pointer (i.e., the number of the processor to which the datum is to be sent and the destination field within that processor, into which the data will be placed). The communi cations system is very much like a postal system, where you can send a message to anyone else di rectly, provided you know the address, and where many letters can be routed at the same time. The SEND instruction can also be viewed as a parallel “store indirect” instruction that allows each proces sor to store anywhere in the entire memory, not just in its own local memory. The SEND instruction can also take one additional operand that specifies what happens if two or more messages are sent to the same destination. The op tions are to deliver to the destination the sum, maxi mum, minimum, bitwise AND, or bitwise OR of the messages; to deliver one message and discard all others; or to produce an error. From a global point of view, the SEND instruction performs something like an arbitrary permutation on an array of items, although it is actually more

general than a permutation because more than one item may be sent to the same destination. The pat tern is not wired into the hardware, but is encoded as an array of pointers, and is completely under soft ware control; the same encoding, once constructed, can be used over and over again to transfer data repeatedly in the same pattern. To implement a regular communication pattern, such as a two dimensional grid, the pointers are typically com puted when needed rather than stored. The Connection Machine programming model is carefully abstracrted from the details of the hardware that supports it, and, in particular, the number and size of its hardware processors. Programs are de scribed in terms of virtual processors. In actual im plementations, hardware processors are multiplexed as necessary to support this abstraction; indeed, the abstraction is supported at a very low level by a microcoded controller interposed between the front end and the processor array, so that the front end always deals in virtual processors. The benefits of the virtual processor abstraction are twofold. The first is that the same program can be run unchanged on different sizes of the Connec tion Machine system, notwithstanding the linear trade-off between the number of hardware proces sors and execution time. For example, a program that requires 216 virtual processors can run at top speed on a system with the same number of hard ware processors, but it can also be executed on one fourth that amount of hardware (214 processors) at one-fourth the speed, provided it can fit into one fourth the amount of memory as well. The second benefit is that for many purposes the number of processors may be regarded as expanda ble rather than fixed, so that it becomes natural to write programs using the Lisp, Pascal, or C style of storage allocation rather than the Fortran style. By this we mean that there is a procedure one can call to allocate a “fresh” processor as if from thin air while the program is running. In Fortran, all storage is preallocated before program execution begins, whereas Lisp has the cons operation to allocate a new list cell (as well as other operations for con structing other objects); Pascal has the new opera tion; and C has the malloc function. In each case, a new object is allocated and a pointer to this new object is returned. Of course, in the underlying im plementation, the address space (physical or virtual) is actually a fixed resource pool from which all such requests are satisfied, but the point is that the lan guage supports the abstraction of newly created stor age. In the Connection Machine model, one may similarly allocate fresh storage using the operation

processor-cons; the difference is that the newly allo cated storage comes with its own processor attached. In the ensuing discussion, we shall assume that the size and number of processors are sufficient to allocate one processor for each data element in the problem being solved. This allows us to adopt a model of the machine in which the following are counted as unit-time operations: l any conventional word-at-a-time operation; l any such operation applied to all the data ele ments concurrently, or to some selected subset; l any communications step that involves the broad cast of information to all data elements; l any communications step that involves no more than a single message transmission from each data element. For purposes of analysis, it is also often useful to treat processor-cons as a unit-time operation, although it may be implemented in terms of more primitive operations, as described in more detail on page 1176.

EXAMPLES OF PARALLEL PROGRAMMING To show some of the possibilities of data-parallel programming, we present here several algorithms currently in use on the Connection Machine system. Most of these algorithms are not new: Some of the ideas represented here appear in the languages APL [ll, 151 and FP [l], while others are based on algo rithms designed for other parallel machines, in par ticular, the Ultracomputer [z], and still others have been developed by our coworkers on the Connection Machine [4, 5, 7, 9, 10, 191. Beginning with some very simple examples to familiarize the reader with the model and the nota tion, we then proceed to more elaborate and less obvious examples.

Sum of an Array of Numbers The sum of n numbers can be computed in time O(log n) by organizing the addends at the leaves of a binary tree and performing the sums at each level of the tree in parallel. There are several ways of orga nizing an array into a binary tree. Figure 1 illus trates one such method on an array of 16 elements named x0 through x15. In this algorithm, for purposes of simplicity, the number of elements to be summed is assumed to be an integral power of two. There are as many processors as elements, and the statement for all k in parallel do s od causes all processors to execute the same statement s in synchrony, but the variable k has a different value for each processor,

FIGURE 1. Computing the Sum of an Array of 16 Elements namely, the index of that processor within the array. for j := I to log,n do for all k in parallel do if ((k + 1) mod 2j) = 0 then x[k] := x[k - 2+] + x[k]

fi od od At the end of the process, x,,-1 contains the sum of the n elements. On the Connection Machine, an op timized version of this algorithm for 65,536 elements takes about 200 microseconds. All Partial Sums of an Array A frequently useful operation is computing all par tial sums of an array of numbers. In APL, this com putation is called a plus-scan; in other contexts, it is called the “sum-prefix” operation because it com putes sums over all prefixes of the array. For exam ple, if you put into an array your initial checkbook balance, followed by the amounts of the checks you have written as negative numbers and deposits as positive numbers, then computing the partial sums produces all the intermediate and final balances. It might seem that computing such partial sums is an inherently serial process, because one must add up the first k elements before adding in element

k + 1. Indeed, with only one processor, one might as well do it that way, but with many processors one can do better, essentially because in log n time with n processors one can do n log n individual additions; serialization is avoided by performing logically re dundant additions. Looking again at the simple summation algorithm given on the facing page, we see that most of the processors are idle most of the time: During iteration j, only n/21 processors are active, and, indeed, half of the processors are never used. However, by putting the idle processors to good use by allowing more processors to operate, the summation algorithm can compute all partial sums of the array in the same amount of time it took to compute the single sum. In defining 1: to mean C!=j x,, note that Cf + CF+i = Cr. The partial-sums algorithm replaces each xk by xi: that is, the sum of all elements preceding and including &. In Figure 2 (on the following page), this process is illustrated for an array of 16 elements. for j := I to log,n do for all k in parallel do if k 2 2i then x[k] := x[k - 2’-‘1 + x[k]

fi od od

FIGURE 2. Computing Partial Sums of an Array of 16 Elements

The only difference between this algorithm and the earlier one is the test in the if statement in the partial-sums algorithm that determines whether a processor will perform the assignment. This algorithm keeps more processors active: Dur ing step j, n - 2’-’ processors are in use; after step j, element number k has become Ci where a = max(O, k - 2j + 1). This technique can be generalized from summa tion to any associ.ative combining operation. Some obvious choices are product, maximum, minimum, and logical AND, OR, and EXCLUSIVE OR. Some programming languages provide such reduction and parallel-prefix operations on arrays as primitives. The current proposal for Fortran 8x, for example, provides reduction operations called SUM, PRODUCT, MAXVAL, MINVAL, ANY, and ALL. The corresponding reduction functions in APL are +/, x/, [ /, 1 /, V/. and A/; APL also provides other reduction operations and all the corresponding scan (prefix) operations. The combining functions for all these operations happen to be commutative as well, but the algorithm does not depend on commu tativity. This was no accident; we took care to write x[k] := x[k - 2+] + x[k]

instead of the more usual x[k] := x[k] + x[k - 2j-‘1

precisely in order to preserve the correctness of the algorithm when + is replaced by an associative but noncommutative operator. Under “Parsing a Reg ular Language” (facing page), we discuss the use of parallel-prefix computations with a noncommutative combining function for a nonnumerical application, specifically, the division of a character string into tokens. Another associative noncommutative opera tor of particular practical importance is matrix mul tiplication. We have found this technique useful in multiplying long chains of matrices.

Counting and Enumerating Active Processors After some subset of the processors has been selected according to some condition (i.e., by using the result of a test to set the context flags), two operations are frequently useful: determining how many processors are active, and assigning a distinct integer to each processor. We call the first operation count and the second enumerate: Both are easily implemented in terms of summation and sum-prefix.

To count the active processors, we have every processor unconditionally examine its context flag and compute the integer 1 if the flag is set and 0 if it is clear. (Remember that an unconditional operation is performed by every processor regardless of whether or not its context flag is set.) We then per form an unconditional summation of these integer values. To enumerate the active processors, we have every processor unconditionally compute a 1 or 0 in the same manner, but then we perform an uncondi tional sum-prefix calculation with the result that every processor receives a count of the number of active processors that precede it (including itself) in the ordering. We then revert to conditional opera tion; in effect, the selected processors have received distinct integers, and values computed for the dese lected processors are henceforth simply ignored. Finally, it is technically convenient to have every selected processor subtract one from its value, so that the n selected processors will receive values from 0 to n - 1 rather than from 1 to n. These operations each take about 200 microsec onds on a Connection Machine of 65,536 elements. Because these operations are so fast, programming models of the Connection Machine have been sug gested that treat counting and enumeration as unit time operations [6, 71.

Radix Sort Sorting is a communications-intensive operation. In parallel computers with fixed patterns of communi cation, the pattern of physical connections usually suggests the use of a particular sorting algorithm. For example, Batcher’s bitonic sort [2] fits nicely on processors connected in a perfect shuffle pattern, bubble sorts [16] work well on one-dimensionally connected processing, and so on. In the Connection Machine model, the ability to access data in parallel in any pattern often eliminates the need to sort data. When it is necessary to sort, however, the generality of communications provides an embarrassment of riches. Upon implementing several sorting algorithms on the Connection Machine and comparing them for speed, we found that, for the current hardware implementation, Batcher’s method has good perfor mance for large sort keys, whereas for small sort keys a version of radix sort is usually faster. (The break even point is for keys about 25 to 32 bits in length. With either algorithm, sorting 65, 536 32-bit num bers on the Connection Machine takes about 30 milliseconds.)

To illustrate the use of count and enumerate, we present here the radix sort algorithm. In the inter est of simplicity, we will assume that all processors (n) are active, that sort keys are unsigned integers, and that maxint is the value of the largest represent able key value. for j := I to I + tlog, maxintJ do for all k in parallel do if (x[k] mod 2’) c 2j-’ then comment The bit with weight 2j-’ is zero. tnemmoc y [k] := enumerate c := count

fi if (x[k] mod 2’) 2 2j-’ then comment The bit with weight 2j-’ is one. tnemmoc y [k] := enumerate + c

fi

X[Y PI1 := +I od od At this point, an explanation of a fine point concern ing the intended semantics of our algorithmic nota tion is in order. An if statement that is executed for all processors is always assumed to execute its then part, even if no processors are selected, because some front-end computations (such as count) might be included. When the then part is executed, the active processors are those previously active proces sors that computed true for the condition. The radix sort requires a logarithmic number of passes, where each pass essentially examines one bit of each key. All keys that have a 0 in that bit are counted (call the count c) and then enumerated in order to assign them distinct integers yk ranging from 0 to c - 1. All keys that have a 1 in that bit are then enumerated, and c is added to the result, thereby assigning these keys distinct integers yk ranging from c to n - I. The values yk are then used to permute the keys so that all keys with a 0 bit precede all keys with a I bit. (This is the step that takes particular advantage of general communication.) This permuta tion is stable: The order of any two keys that both have 0 bits or both 1 bits is preserved. This stability property is important because the keys are sorted by least significant bit first and most significant bit last.

Parsing a Regular Language To illustrate the use of a parallel-prefix computation in a nonnumerical application, consider the problem of parsing a regular language. For a concrete practi cal instance, let us consider the problem of breaking

Decenrber 1986 Volume 29 Number 12 Communications of the ACM 1175

up a long string of characters :into tokens, which is usually the first thing a compiler does when process ing a program. A string of characters such as if x <=n then print (“>c = “) x) ; must be broken up into the following tokens, with redundant white space eliminated:

This process is sometimes called Zexing a string. Any regular language of this type can be parsed by a finite-state automaton that begins in a certain state and makes a transition from one state to another (possibly the same one) as each character is read. Such an automat.on can be represented as a two dimensional array that maps the old state and the character read to the new state. Some of the states correspond to the start of a token; if the automaton is in one of those states just after reading a charac ter, then that character is the first character of a token. Some characters may not be part of any to ken; White-space characters, for example, are typi cally not part of a token unless they occur within a string; such delimiting characters may also be iden tified by the automaton state just after the character is read. To divide a string up into tokens, then, means merely determining the state of the automa ton after each character has been processed. Table I shows the automaton array for a simple language in which a token may be one of three things: a sequence of alphabetic characters, a string surrounded by double quotes (where an embedded double quote is represented by two consecutive dou ble quotes), or any of +, -, *, =, C, >, <=, and >=. Spaces and newlines delimit tokens, but are not part of any token except quoted strings. The automaton has nine states: N is the initial state; A is the start of an alphabetic token; Z is the continuation of an al phabetic token; 1: is a single-special-character token; < is a < or > character; = is an = that follows a < or > character (an = that does not follow < or > will produce state *); Q is the double quote that starts a string; S is a character within a string; and E is the double quote that ends a string, or the first of two that indicate an embedded double quote. The states A, *, <, and Q indicate that the character just read is the first character of a token. Although, like the computation of partial sums, this may appear at first glance to be an inherently serial process, it too can be put into the form of a parallel-prefix computation. Rather than regarding

the lexing automaton as a monolithic process, let us regard the individual characters of the string as unary functions that map an automaton state onto another state. By indicating the application of the character Y to state N as NY, we may then write NY = A. By extension, it is also possible to regard a string as a function that maps a state p to another state 4; 4 is the state you end up in if you start the automaton in state p and then let the automaton read the entire string one character at a time. The result of applying the string Y “+ to the state Z may be written as ZY”+ = ((ZY)“)+ = (Z”)+ = Q+ = S. It is not too hard to see that the function correspond ing to a string is simply the composition of the func tions for the individual characters. A function from a state to a state can be repre sented as a one-dimensional array indexed by states whose elements are states. The columns of the array in Table I are in fact exactly such representations for the functions for individual characters. Composing the columns for two characters or strings to produce a new column for the concatenation of the strings is fairly straightforward: You simply replace every entry of one column with the result of using that entry to index into the other column. Since this composition operation is associative, we may compute the automaton state after every char acter in a string as follows: Replace every character in the string with the array representation of its state-to-state function. Perform a parallel-prefix operation. The combin ing function is the composition of arrays as described above. The net effect is that, after this step, every character c of the original string has been replaced by an array representing the state to-state function for that prefix of the original string that ends at (and includes) c. Use the initial automaton state (N in our exam ple) to index into all these arrays. Now every character has been replaced by the state the automaton would have after that character. If we implement this algorithm on a Connection Machine system and allot one processor per charac ter, the first and third steps will take constant time, and the second step will take time logarithmic in the length of the string. Naturally, this algorithm per forms much more computation per character than the straightforward serial algorithm using the two dimensional array, but, for sufficiently large amounts of text, the parallel algorithm will be faster because its time complexity is logarithmic instead of linear. An implementation of this algorithm in Con nection Machine Lisp can be found in [24].

PARALLEL PROCESSING OF POINTERS Processor-cons To illustrate pointer manipulation algorithms, we will consider the implementation of the processor cons primitive, which allows a set of processors to establish pointers to a set of new processors allo cated from free storage. In a serial computer, the equivalent problem is usually solved by keeping the free storage in an ordered list and allocating new storage from the beginning of the list. In the Connec tion Machine, this would not suffice since we wish to allocate many elements concurrently. Instead, the processor-cons primitive is implemented in terms of enumerate by using a rendezvous technique: Two sets of m processors are brought into one-to-one communication by using the processors numbered 0 through m - 1 as rendezvous points. Assuming that every processor has a Boolean vari able called free, freek becomes true if processor k is available for allocation and false otherwise. Every selected processor is to receive, in a variable called new-processor, the number of a distinct free proces sor. Free processors that are so allocated have their free bits reset to false in the process. If there are fewer free processors than selected processors, then as many requests are satisfied as possible, and some selected processors will have their new-processor variables set to null instead of the number of a free processor, as shown below. for all k in parallel do required := count unconditionally if free [k] then available := count free-processor[k] := enumerate if free-processor[k] < required then free[k] := false

fi rendezvous Ifree-processor[k]] := k requestor[k] := enumerate fi yllanoitidnocnu if requestor[k] < available then new-processor := rerzdezvous[requestor[k]] else new-processor := null

fi od In this way, the total number of processors is man aged as a finite resource, but with an interface that presents the illusion of creating new processors on demand. (Of course, we have not indicated how

TABLE I. A Finite-State Automaton for Recognizing Tokens Old Character Read State

New . A B Y Z + - * < > = ” Space line N AA A 22 2 zz A A :: AA = AA Q SS s ss E EE

AA* * *<<*Q N N zz* * *<<*Q N N zz* * *<<*Q N N AA* * *<<:Q N N AA* * *<<=Q N N AA* * *<<*Q N N SSSSSSSSE S S SSSSSSSSE S S EE*t*<