A Checkpoint-on-Failure Protocol for
Algorithm-Based Recovery in Standard MPI
Wesley Bland, Peng Du, Aurelien Bouteiller, Thomas Herault, George Bosilca,
and Jack J. Dongarra
Innovative Computing Laboratory, University of Tennessee
1122 Volunteer Blvd., Knoxville, TN 37996-3450, USA
{bland, du, bouteill, herault, bosilca, dongarra}@eecs.utk.edu
Abstract. Most predictions of Exascale machines picture billion way
parallelism, encompassing not only millions of cores, but also tens of
thousands of nodes. Even considering extremely optimistic advances in
hardware reliability, probabilistic amplification entails that failures will
be unavoidable. Consequently, software fault tolerance is paramount to
maintain future scientific productivity. Two major problems hinder ubiquitous adoption of fault tolerance techniques: 1) traditional checkpoint
based approaches incur a steep overhead on failure free operations and
2) the dominant programming paradigm for parallel applications (the
MPI standard) offers extremely limited support of software-level fault
tolerance approaches. In this paper, we present an approach that relies
exclusively on the features of a high quality implementation, as defined by
the current MPI standard, to enable algorithmic based recovery, without
incurring the overhead of customary periodic checkpointing. The validity
and performance of this approach are evaluated on large scale systems,
using the QR factorization as an example.
1 Introduction
The insatiable processing power needs of domain science has pushed High Performance Computing (HPC) systems to feature a significant performance increase
over the years, even outpacing “Moore’s law” expectations. Leading HPC systems, whose architectural history is listed in the Top500 1
ranking, illustrate the
massive parallelism that has been embraced in the recent years; current number
1 – the K-computer – has half a million cores, and even with the advent of GPU
accelerators, it requires no less than 73,000 cores for the Tsubame 2.0 system
(#5) to breach the Petaflop barrier. Indeed, the International Exascale Software
Project, a group created to evaluate the challenges on the path toward Exascale,
has published a public report outlining that a massive increase in scale will be
necessary when considering probable advances in chip technology, memory and
interconnect speeds, as well as limitations in power consumption and thermal
envelope [1]. According to these projections, as early as 2014, billion way parallel machines, encompassing millions of cores, and tens of thousands of nodes,
1 www.top500.org
will be necessary to achieve the desired level of performance. Even considering
extremely optimistic advances in hardware reliability, probabilistic amplification
entails that failures will be unavoidable, becoming common events. Hence, fault
tolerance is paramount to maintain scientific productivity.
Already, for Petaflop scale systems the issue has become pivotal. On one
hand, the capacity type workload, composed of a large amount of medium to
small scale jobs, which often represent the bulk of the activity on many HPC
systems, is traditionally left unprotected from failures, resulting in diminished
throughput due to failures. On the other hand, selected capability applications,
whose significance is motivating the construction of supercomputing systems,
are protected against failures by ad-hoc, application-specific approaches, at the
cost of straining engineering efforts, translating into high software development
expenditures. Traditional approaches based on periodic checkpointing and rollback recovery, incurs a steep overhead, as much as 25% [2], on failure-free operations. Forward recovery techniques, most notably Algorithm-Based Fault Tolerant techniques (ABFT), are using mathematical properties to reconstruct failuredamaged data and do exhibit significantly lower overheads [3]. However, and this
is a major issue preventing their wide adoption, the resiliency support ABFT
demands from the MPI library largely exceeds the specifications of the MPI
standard [4] and has proven to be an unrealistic requirement, considering that
only a handful of MPI implementations provide it.
The current MPI-2 standard leaves open an optional behavior regarding failures to qualify as a “high quality implementation.” According to this specification, when using the MPI ERRORS RETURN error handler, the MPI library
should return control to the user when it detects a failure. In this paper, we
propose the idea of Checkpoint-on-Failure (CoF) as a minimal impact feature to
enable MPI libraries to support forward recovery strategies. Despite the default
application-wide abort action that all notable MPI implementations undergo in
case of a failure, we demonstrate that an implementation that enables CoF is
simple and yet effectively supports ABFT recovery strategies that completely
avoid costly periodic checkpointing.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The next section presents
typical fault tolerant approaches and related works to discuss their requirements
and limitations. Then in Section 3 we present the CoF approach, and the minimal support required from the MPI implementation. Section 4 presents a practical use case: the ABFT QR algorithm and how it has been modified to fit
the proposed paradigm. Section 5 presents an experimental evaluation of the
implementation, followed by our conclusions.
2 Background & Related Work
Message passing is the dominant form of communication used in parallel applications, and MPI is the most popular library used to implement it. In this
context, the primary form of fault tolerance today is rollback recovery with periodical checkpoints to disk. While this method is effective in allowing applications
to recover from failures using a previously saved state, it causes serious scalability concerns [5]. Moreover, periodic checkpointing requires precise heuristics
for fault frequency to minimize the number of superfluous, expensive protective
actions [6–10]. In contrast, the work presented here focuses on enabling forward
recovery. Checkpoint actions are taken only after a failure is detected; hence
the checkpoint interval is optimal by definition, as there will be one checkpoint
interval per effective fault.
Forward recovery leverages algorithms properties to complete operations despite failures. In Naturally Fault Tolerant applications, the algorithm can compute the solution while totally ignoring the contributions of failed processes.
In ABFT applications, a recovery phase is necessary, but failure damaged data
can be reconstructed only by applying mathematical operations on the remaining
dataset [11]. A recoverable dataset is usually created by initially computing redundant data, dispatched so as to avoid unrecoverable loss of information from
failures. At each iteration, the algorithm applies the necessary mathematical
transformations to update the redundant data (at the expense of more communication and computation). Despite great scalability and low overhead [3, 12],
the adoption of such algorithms has been hindered by the requirement that the
support environment must continue to consistently deliver communications, even
after being crippled by failures.
The current MPI Standard (MPI-2.2, [4]) does not provide significant help to
deal with the required type of behavior. Section 2.8 states in the first paragraph:
“MPI does not provide mechanisms for dealing with failures in the communication system. [. . . ] Whenever possible, such failures will be reflected as errors in
the relevant communication call. Similarly, MPI itself provides no mechanisms
for handling processor failures.” Failures, be they due to a broken link or a dead
process, are considered resource errors. Later, in the same section: “This document does not specify the state of a computation after an erroneous MPI call
has occurred. The desired behavior is that a relevant error code be returned, and
the effect of the error be localized to the greatest possible extent.” So, for the
current standard, process or communication failures are to be handled as errors,
and the behavior of the MPI application, after an error has been returned, is
left unspecified by the standard. However, the standard does not prevent implementations from going beyond its requirements, and on the contrary, encourages
high-quality implementations to return errors, once a failure is detected. Unfortunately, most of the implementations of the MPI Standard have taken the path
of considering process failures as unrecoverable errors, and the processes of the
application are most often killed by the runtime system when a failure hits any
of them, leaving no opportunity for the user to mitigate the impact of failures.
Some efforts have been undertaken to enable ABFT support in MPI. FTMPI [13] was an MPI-1 implementation which proposed to change the MPI
semantic to enable repairing communicators, thus re-enabling communications
for applications damaged by failures. This approach has proven successful and
applications have been implemented using FT-MPI. However, these modifica-
tions were not adopted by the MPI standardization body, and the resulting lack
of portability undermined user adoption for this fault tolerant solution.
In [14], the authors discuss alternative or slightly modified interpretations of
the MPI standard that enable some forms of fault tolerance. One core idea is
that process failures happening in another MPI world, connected only through an
inter-communicator, should not prevent the continuation of normal operations.
The complexity of this approach, for both the implementation and users, has
prevented these ideas from having a practical impact. In the CoF approach, the
only requirement from the MPI implementation is that it does not forcibly kill
the living processes without returning control. No stronger support from the MPI
stack is required, and the state of the library is left undefined. This simplicity
has enabled us to actually implement our proposition, and then experimentally
support and evaluate a real ABFT application.
3 Enabling Algorithm-Based Fault Tolerance in MPI
3.1 The Checkpoint-on-Failure Protocol
In this paper, we advocate that an extremely efficient form of fault tolerance
can be implemented, strictly based on the MPI standard, for applications capable of taking advantage of forward recovery. ABFT methods are an example of
forward recovery algorithms, capable of restoring missing data from redundant
information located on other processes. This forward recovery step requires communication between processes, and we acknowledge that, in light of the current
standard, requiring the MPI implementation to maintain service after failures is
too demanding. However, a high-quality MPI library should at least allow the
application to regain control following a process failure. We note that this control gives the application the opportunity to save its state and exit gracefully,
rather than the usual behavior of being aborted by the MPI implementation.
Algorithm 1 The Checkpoint-on-Failure Protocol
1. MPI returns an error on surviving processes
2. Surviving processes checkpoint
3. Surviving processes exit
4. A new MPI application is started
5. Processes load from checkpoint (if any)
6. Processes enter ABFT dataset recovery
7. Application resumes
?
ABFT
Recovery
1
2
3
4
5 6
7
Based on these observations, we propose a new approach for supporting
ABFT applications, called Checkpoint-on-Failure (CoF). Algorithm 1 presents
the steps involved in the CoF method. In the associated explanatory figure,
horizontal lines represent the execution of processes in two successive MPI applications. When a failure eliminates a process, other processes are notified and
regain control from ongoing MPI calls (1). Surviving processes assume the MPI
library is dysfunctional and do not further call MPI operations (in particular,
they do not yet undergo ABFT recovery). Instead, they checkpoint their current
state independently and abort (2, 3). When all processes exited, the job is usually
terminated, but the user (or a managing script, batch scheduler, runtime support system, etc.) can launch a new MPI application (4), which reloads processes
from checkpoint (5). In the new application, the MPI library is functional and
communications possible; the ABFT recovery procedure is called to restore the
data of the process(es) that could not be restarted from checkpoint (6). When
the global state has been repaired by the ABFT procedure, the application is
ready to resume normal execution.
Compared to periodic checkpointing, in CoF, a process pays the cost of creating a checkpoint only when a failure has happened, hence an optimal number
of checkpoints during the run (and no checkpoint overhead on failure-free executions). Moreover, in periodic checkpointing, a process is protected only when
its checkpoint is stored on safe, remote storage, while in CoF, local checkpoints
are sufficient: the forward recovery algorithm reconstructs datasets of processes
which cannot restart from checkpoint. Of course, CoF also exhibits the same
overhead as the standard ABFT approach: the application might need to do
extra computation, even in the absence of failures, to maintain internal redundancy used to recover data damaged by failures. However, ABFT techniques
often demonstrate excellent scalability; for example, the overhead on failurefree execution of the ABFT QR operation (used as an example in Section 4) is
inversely proportional to the number of processes.
3.2 MPI Requirements for Checkpoint-on-Failure
Returning Control over Failures: In most MPI implementations, MPI ERRORS -
ABORT is the default (and often, only functional) error handler. However, the
MPI standard also defines the MPI ERRORS RETURN handler. To support
CoF, the MPI library should never deadlock because of failures, but invoke the
error handler, at least on processes doing direct communications with the failed
process. The handler takes care of cleaning up at the library level and returns
control to the application.
Termination After Checkpoint: A process that detects a failure ceases to use
MPI. It only checkpoints on some storage and exits without calling MPI Finalize.
Exiting without calling MPI Finalize is an error from the MPI perspective, hence
the failure cascades and MPI eventually returns with a failure notification on
every process, which triggers their own checkpoint procedure and termination.
3.3 Open MPI Implementation
Open MPI is an MPI 2.2 implementation architected such that it contains two
main levels, the runtime (ORTE) and the MPI library (OMPI). As with most
MPI library implementations, the default behavior of Open MPI is to abort after
a process failure. This policy was implemented in the runtime system, preventing
any kind of decision from the MPI layer or the user-level. The major change
requested by the CoF protocol was to make the runtime system resilient, and
leave the decision in case of failure to the MPI library policy, and ultimately to
the user application.
Failure Resilient Runtime: The ORTE runtime layer provides an out-of-band
communication mechanism (OOB) that relays messages based on a routing policy. Node failures not only impact the MPI communications, but also disrupt
routing at the OOB level. However, redeployment of a parallel job incurs a significant cost, hence the default routing policy in the Open MPI runtime has been
amended to allow for self-healing behaviors. The underlying OOB topology is
automatically updated to route around failed processes. In some routing topologies, such as a star, this is a trivial operation and only requires excluding the
failed process from the routing tables. For more elaborate topologies, such as a
binomial tree, the healing operation involves computing the closest neighbors in
the direction of the failed process and reconnecting the topology through them.
The repaired topology is not rebalanced, resulting in degraded performance but
complete functionality after failures. Although in-flight messages that were currently “hopping” through the failed processes are lost, other in-flight messages
are safely routed on the repaired topology. Thanks to self-healing topologies, the
runtime remains responsive, even when MPI processes leave.
Failure Notification: The runtime has been augmented with a failure detection
service. To track the status of the failures, an incarnation number has been
included in the process names. Following a failure, the name of the failed process
(including the incarnation number) is broadcasted over the OOB topology. By
including this incarnation number, we can identify transient process failures,
prevent duplicate detections, and track message status. ORTE processes monitor
the health of their neighbors in the OOB routing topology. Detection of other
processes rely on a failure resilient broadcast that overlays on the OOB topology.
This algorithm has a low probability of creating a bi-partition of the routing
topology, hence ensuring a high accuracy of the failure detector. However, the
underlying OOB routing algorithm has a significant influence on failure detection
and propagation time, as the experiments will show. On each node, the ORTE
runtime layer forwards failure notifications to the MPI layer, which has been
modified to invoke the appropriate MPI error handler.
4 Example: the QR Factorization
In this section, we propose to illustrate the applicability of CoF by considering a representative routine of a widely used class of algorithms: dense linear
factorizations. The QR factorization is a cornerstone building block in many
applications, including solving Ax = b when matrices are ill-conditioned, computing eigenvalues, least square problems, or solving sparse systems through the
GMRES iterative method. For an M × N matrix A, the QR factorization produces Q and R, such that A = QR and Q is an M × M orthogonal matrix and
R is an M × N upper triangular matrix. The most commonly used implementation of the QR algorithm on a distributed memory machine comes from the
ScaLAPACK linear algebra library [15], based on the block QR algorithm. It
uses a 2D block-cyclic distribution for load balance, and is rich in level 3 BLAS
operations, thereby achieving high performance.
4.1 ABFT QR Factorization
In the context of FT-MPI, the ScaLAPACK QR algorithm has been rendered
fault tolerant through an ABFT method in previous works [12]. This ABFT
algorithm protects both the left (Q) and right (R) factors from fail-stop failures
at any time during the execution. At the time of failure, the name of the failed
process is notified to every surviving processes by FT-MPI. FT-MPI then spawns
a replacement process, that takes the same grid coordinates in the P × Q blockcyclic distribution. Missing checksums are recovered from duplicates, a reduction
collective communication recovers missing data blocks in the right factor from
checksums. The left factor is protected by the Q-parallel panel checksum, it
is either directly recovered from checksum, or by recomputing the panels in
the current Q-wide section (see [12]). Although this algorithm is fault tolerant,
it requires continued service from the MPI library after failures – which is a
stringent requirement that can be waived with CoF.
4.2 Checkpoint-on-Failure QR
Checkpoint Procedure: Compared to a regular ABFT algorithm, CoF requires an
additional checkpoint procedure. System-level checkpointing is not applicable,
as it would result in restoring the state of the broken MPI library upon restart.
Instead, a custom MPI error handler invokes an algorithm specific checkpoint
procedure, which simply dumps the matrices and the value of important loop
indices into a file.
State Restoration: A ScaLAPACK program has a deep call stack, layering functions from multiple software packages, such as PBLAS, BLACS, LAPACK and
BLAS. In the FT-MPI version of the algorithm, regardless of when the failure is
detected, the current iteration of the algorithm must be completed before entering the recovery procedure. This ensures an identical call stack on every process
and a complete update of the checksums. In the case of the CoF protocol, failures
interrupt the algorithm immediately, the current iteration cannot be completed
due to lack of communication capabilities. This results in potentially diverging
call stacks and incomplete updates of checksums. However, because failure notification happens only in MPI, lower level, local procedures (BLAS, LAPACK)
are never interrupted.
To resolve the call stack issue, every process restarted from checkpoint undergoes a “dry run” phase. This operation mimics the loop nests of the QR
algorithm down to the PBLAS level, without actually applying modifications to
or exchanging data. When the same loop indices as before the failure are reached,
the matrix content is loaded from the checkpoint; the state is then similar to that
of the FT-MPI based ABFT QR after a failure. The regular recovery procedure
can be applied: the current iteration of the factorization is completed to update
all checksums and the dataset is rebuilt using the ABFT reduction.
5 Performance Discussion
In this section, we use our Open MPI and ABFT QR implementations to evaluate
the performance of the CoF protocol. We use two test platforms. The first machine, “Dancer,” is a 16-node cluster. All nodes are equipped with two 2.27GHz
quad-core Intel E5520 CPUs, with a 20GB/s Infiniband interconnect. Solid State
Drive disks are used as the checkpoint storage media. The second system is the
Kraken supercomputer. Kraken is a Cray XT5 machine, with 9,408 compute
nodes. Each node has two Istanbul 2.6 GHz six-core AMD Opteron processors,
16 GB of memory, and are connected through the SeaStar2+ interconnect. The
scalable cluster file system “Lustre” is used to store checkpoints.
5.1 MPI Library Overhead
One of the concerns with fault tolerance is the amount of overhead introduced by
the fault tolerance management additions. Our implementation of fault detection
and notification is mostly implemented in the non-critical ORTE runtime. Typical HPC systems feature a separated service network (usually Ethernet based)
and a performance interconnect, hence health monitoring traffic, which happens
on the OOB service network, is physically separated from the MPI communications, leaving no opportunity for network jitter. Changes to MPI functions are
minimal: the same condition that used to trigger unconditional abort has been
repurposed to trigger error handlers. As expected, no impact on MPI bandwidth
or latency was measured (Infiniband and Portals results not shown for lack of
space). The memory usage of the MPI library is slightly increased, as the incarnation number doubles the size of process names; however, this is negligible in
typical deployments.
5.2 Failure Detection
According to the requirement specified in Section 3.2, only in-band failure detection is required to enable CoF. Processes detecting a failure checkpoint then
exit, cascading the failure to processes communicating with them. However, no
recovery action (in particular checkpointing) can take place before a failure has
been notified. Thanks to asynchronous failure propagation in the runtime, responsiveness can be greatly improved, with a high probability for the next MPI
call to detect the failures, regardless of communication pattern or checkpoint
duration.
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
 3.5
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Detection Time (milliseconds)
Rank
Failure on Rank 1 (Low)
Failure on Rank 8 (Middle)
Failure on Rank 15 (High)
(a) Linear OOB Topology
 1
 1.5
 2
 2.5
 3
 3.5
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Detection Time (milliseconds)
Rank
Failure on Rank 1 (Low)
Failure on Rank 8 (Middle)
Failure on Rank 15 (High)
(b) Binomial OOB Topology
Fig. 1. Failure Detection Time According to Rank.
We designed a micro-benchmark to measure failure detection time as experienced by MPI processes. The benchmark code synchronizes with an MPI Barrier,
stores the reference date, injects a failure at a specific rank, and enters a ring algorithm until the MPI error handler stores the detection date. The OOB routing
topology used by the ORTE runtime introduces a non-uniform distance to the
failed process, hence failure detection time experienced by a process may vary
with the position of the failed process in the topology, and the OOB topology.
Figure 1(a) and 1(b) present the case of the linear and binomial OOB topologies,
respectively. The curves “Low, Middle, High” present the behavior for failures
happening at different positions in the OOB topology. On the horizontal axis
is the rank of the detecting process, on the vertical axis is the detection time
it experienced. The experiment uses 16 nodes, with one process per node, MPI
over Infiniband, OOB over Ethernet, an average of 20 runs, and the MPI barrier
latency is four orders of magnitude lower than measured values.
In the linear topology (Figure 1(a)) every runtime process is connected to
the mpirun process. For a higher rank, failure detection time increases linearly
because it is notified by the mpirun process only after the notification has been
sent to all lower ranks. This issue is bound to increase with scale. The binomial
tree topology (Figure 1(b)) exhibits a similar best failure detection time. However, this more scalable topology has a low output degree and eliminates most
contentions on outgoing messages, resulting in a more stable, lower average detection time, regardless of the failure position. Overall, failure detection time is
on the order of milliseconds, a much smaller figure than typical checkpoint time.
5.3 Checkpoint-on-Failure QR Performance
Supercomputer Performance: Figure 2 presents the performance on the Kraken
supercomputer. The process grid is 24×24 and the block size is 100. The FT-QR
(no failure) presents the performance of the CoF QR implementation, in a faultfree execution; it is noteworthy, that when there are no failures, the performance
is exactly identical to the performance of the regular FT-QR implementation.
The FT-QR (with failure) curves present the performance when a failure is
0 
0.5 
1 
1.5 
2 
2.5 
3 
3.5 
Tflop/s 
Matrix Size 
ScaLAPACK QR 
FT-QR (no failure) 
FT-QR (with failure) 
Fig. 2. Performance on
Kraken (24 × 24 grid)
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
Gflop/s 
Matrix Size 
ScaLAPACK QR 
FT-QR (no failure) 
FT-QR (with failure) 
(a) Performance
0%#
1%#
2%#
3%#
4%#
5%#
6%#
Percentage)of),me)
Matrix)size)
Load#Checkpoint#
Dump#Checkpoint#
ABFT#Recovery#
(b) Breakdown
Fig. 3. Results on Dancer (16 × 8 grid)
injected after the first step of the PDLARFB kernel. The performance of the
non-fault tolerant ScaLAPACK QR is also presented for reference.
Without failures, the performance overhead compared to the regular ScaLAPACK is caused by the extra computation to maintain the checksums inherent
to the ABFT algorithm [12]; this extra computation is unchanged between CoF
FT-QR and regular FT-QR. Only on runs where failure happened the CoF protocols undergoes the supplementary overhead of storing and reloading checkpoints.
However, the performance of the CoF FT-QR remains very close to the no-failure
case. For instance, at matrix size N=100,000, CoF FT-QR still achieves 2.86
Tflop/s after recovering from a failure, which is 90% of the performance of the
non-fault tolerant ScaLAPACK QR. This demonstrates that the CoF protocol
enables efficient, practical recovery schemes on supercomputers.
Impact of Local Checkpoint Storage: Figure 3(a) presents the performance of
the CoF FT-QR implementation on the Dancer cluster, with a 8 × 16 process
grid. Although a smaller test platform, the Dancer cluster features local storage
on nodes and a variety of performance analysis tools unavailable on Kraken. As
expected (see [12]), the ABFT method has a higher relative cost on this smaller
machine. Compared to the Kraken platform, the relative cost of CoF failure recovery is smaller on Dancer. The CoF protocol incurs disk accesses to store and
load checkpoints when a failure hits, hence the recovery overhead depends on
I/O performance. By breaking down the relative cost of each recovery step in
CoF, Figure 3(b) shows that checkpoint saving and loading only take a small
percentage of the total run-time, thanks to the availability of solid state disks
on every node. Since checkpoint reloading immediately follows checkpointing,
the OS cache satisfy most disk access, resulting in high I/O performance. For
matrices larger than N=44,000, the memory usage on each node is high and
decrease the available space for disk cache, explaining the decline in I/O performance and the higher cost of checkpoint management. Overall, the presence of
fast local storage can be leveraged by the CoF protocol to speedup recovery (unlike periodic checkpointing, which depends on remote storage by construction).
Nonetheless, as demonstrated by the efficiency on Kraken, this is a valuable
optimization, but is not a mandatory requirement for satisfactory performance.
6 Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we presented an original scheme to enable forward recovery using
only features of the current MPI standard. Rollback recovery, which relies on
periodic checkpointing has a variety of issues. The ideal period of checkpoint, a
critical parameter, is particularly hard to assess. Too short a period wastes time
and resources on unnecessary Input/Output. Overestimating the period results
in dramatically increasing the lost computation when returning to the distant
last successful checkpoint. Although Checkpoint-on-Failure involves checkpointing, it takes checkpoint images at optimal times by design: only after a failure
has been detected. This small modification enables the deployment of ABFT
techniques, without requiring a complex, unlikely to be available MPI implementation that itself survives failures. The MPI library needs only to provide
the feature set of a high quality implementation of the MPI standard: the MPI
communications may be dysfunctional after a failure, but the library must return
control to the application instead of aborting brutally.
We demonstrated, by providing such an implementation in Open MPI, that
this feature set can be easily integrated without noticeable impact on communication performance. We then converted an existing ABFT QR algorithm to
the CoF protocol. Beyond this example, the CoF protocol is applicable on a
large range of applications that already feature an ABFT version (LLT, LU [16],
CG [17], etc.). Many master-slave and iterative methods enjoy an extremely
inexpensive forward recovery strategy where the damaged domains are simply
discarded, and can also benefit from the CoF protocol.
The performance on the Kraken supercomputer reaches 90% of the non-fault
tolerant algorithm, even when including the cost of recovering from a failure
(a figure similar to regular, non-compliant MPI ABFT). In addition, on a platform featuring node local storage, the CoF protocol can leverage low overhead
checkpoints (unlike rollback recovery that requires remote storage).
The MPI standardization body, the MPI Forum, is currently considering
the addition of new MPI constructs, functions and semantics to support faulttolerant applications. While these additions may decrease the cost of recovery,
they are likely to increase the failure-free overhead on fault tolerant application
performance. It is therefore paramount to compare the cost of the CoF protocol with prospective candidates to standardization on a wide, realistic range of
applications, especially those that feature a low computational intensity.
References
1. J. Dongarra, P. Beckman et al., “The international exascale software roadmap,”
IJHPCA, vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 3–60, 2011.
2. B. Schroeder and G. A. Gibson, “Understanding Failures in Petascale Computers,”
SciDAC, Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 78, 2007.
3. F. Luk and H. Park, “An analysis of algorithm-based fault tolerance techniques,”
Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 172–184, 1988.
4. The MPI Forum, “MPI: A Message-Passing Interface Standard, Version 2.2,” Tech.
Rep., 2099.
5. F. Cappello, A. Geist, B. Gropp, L. V. Kal´e, B. Kramer, and M. Snir, “Toward
exascale resilience,” IJHPCA, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 374–388, 2009.
6. J. W. Young, “A first order approximation to the optimum checkpoint interval,”
Commun. ACM, vol. 17, pp. 530–531, September 1974.
7. E. Gelenbe, “On the optimum checkpoint interval,” JoACM, vol. 26, pp. 259–270,
1979.
8. J. S. Plank and M. G. Thomason, “Processor allocation and checkpoint interval
selection in cluster computing systems,” JPDC, vol. 61, p. 1590, 2001.
9. J. T. Daly, “A higher order estimate of the optimum checkpoint interval for restart
dumps,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 22, pp. 303–312, February 2006.
10. F. Cappello, H. Casanova, and Y. Robert, “Preventive migration vs. preventive
checkpointing for extreme scale supercomputers,” PPL 21:2, pp. 111–132, 2011.
11. K. Huang and J. Abraham, “Algorithm-based fault tolerance for matrix operations,” Computers, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 100, no. 6, pp. 518–528, 1984.
12. P. Du, A. Bouteiller, G. Bosilca, T. Herault, and J. Dongarra, “Algorithm-based
Fault Tolerance for Dense Matrix Factorizations,” in 17th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming. ACM, 2012.
13. G. Fagg and J. Dongarra, “FT-MPI: Fault tolerant MPI, supporting dynamic applications in a dynamic world,” EuroPVM/MPI, 2000.
14. W. Gropp and E. Lusk, “Fault tolerance in message passing interface programs,”
Int. J. High Perform. Comput. Appl., vol. 18, pp. 363–372, August 2004.
15. J. Dongarra, L. Blackford, J. Choi et al., “ScaLAPACK user’s guide,” Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, PA, 1997.
16. T. Davies, C. Karlsson, H. Liu, C. Ding, , and Z. Chen, “High Performance Linpack Benchmark: A Fault Tolerant Implementation without Checkpointing,” in
Proceedings of the 25th ACM International Conference on Supercomputing (ICS
2011). ACM.
17. Z. Chen, G. E. Fagg, E. Gabriel, J. Langou, T. Angskun, G. Bosilca, and
J. Dongarra, “Fault tolerant high performance computing by a coding approach,”
in Proceedings of the tenth ACM SIGPLAN symposium on Principles and practice
of parallel programming, ser. PPoPP ’05. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2005, pp.
213–223. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1065944.1065973