Taking the MPI standard and the Open MPI library to exascale

Journal Title XX(X):1–15 ©The Author(s) 2024 Reprints and permission: sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav DOI: 10.1177/ToBeAssigned www.sagepub.com/ SAGE David E. Bernholdt 1, George Bosilca 2, Aurelien Bouteiller 2, Ron Brightwell 3, Jan Ciesko 3, Matthew G. F. Dosanjh 3, Giorgis Georgakoudis 4, Ignacio Laguna 4, Scott Levy 3, Thomas Naughton 1, Stephen L. Olivier 3, Howard P. Pritchard 5, Whit Schonbein 3, Joseph Schuchart 2, and Amir Shehata 1.

Abstract 
The Open MPI for Exascale (OMPI-X) project was one of two in the Exascale Computing Project (ECP) focused 
on advancing the MPI ecosystem. The OMPI-X team worked with other MPI Forum members to champion several 
important features for inclusion in the MPI 4.0, 4.1, and upcoming 5.0 MPI standard versions, in support of the 
needs of exascale applications and systems. The team also worked with the larger Open MPI community to bring 
implementations of these new features and other enhancements into Open MPI, one of the leading open-source 
implementations of the MPI interface. This paper describes the motivation for the work of the OMPI-X project in 
the context of exascale computing needs, the nature of the resulting new capabilities in the MPI standard, and 
how they were implemented in the Open MPI library. Features include improved support for “MPI+X” programming 
models through partitioned communications and support for user-level threading, sessions, fault tolerance through 
the user-level fault mitigation (ULFM) and Reinit models, and other features. We also discuss enhancements to 
Open MPI providing improved performance and scalability for existing features, such as collective operations, one 
sided operations, support for the Slingshot-11 interconnect of the initial exascale systems, and how the OMPI-X team 
worked to improve quality assurance for the Open MPI library, particularly on platforms of interest to the Department of 
Energy community. 

Keywords Exascale Computing Project, Message Passing Interface

Introduction and Background The Message Passing Interface (MPI) is a community standard for specifying distributed memory parallelism in a portable manner. It is widely used in high-performance computational science and engineering (CSE) applications and associated libraries. Numerous implementations of MPI exist, both open-source and proprietary (often derivatives of open-source implementations). Recognizing the importance of MPI in the CSE software ecosystem, the U.S. Exascale Computing Project 1 (ECP) made significant investments to ensure that both the MPI specification and specific implementations would be ready to meet the community’s

This manuscript has been authored in part by UT-Battelle, LLC, under contract DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the US Department of Energy (DOE). The US government retains and the publisher, by accepting the work for publication, acknowledges that the US government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide license to publish or reproduce the submitted manuscript version of this work, or allow others to do so, for US government purposes. DOE will provide public access to these results of federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan (https://energy.gov/ doe-public-access-plan).

needs on the initial exascale computing platforms. This paper describes the work of the Open MPI for Exascale (OMPI-X) project as part of the ECP and its work towards these goals.

The Exascale Computing Project The Exascale Computing Project was launched in 2016 by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) to ensure that the software ecosystem would be ready to support a broad range of computational science and engineering applications running at scale on the exascale computing systems planned for deployment at DOE computing facilities at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL, the Frontier system 2), Argonne National Laboratory (ANL, Aurora 3), and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL, El Capitan 4) starting in 2022. The core of the ECP effort was the Application Development (AD) component, which

1Oak Ridge National Laboratory, USA 
2University of Tennessee, USA 
3Sandia National Laboratories, USA 
4Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, USA 
5Los Alamos National Laboratory, USA 
Corresponding author: 
David E. Bernholdt, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, P.O.Box 2008, MS 
6164, Oak Ridge, TN 37831-6164 USA. 
Email: bernholdtde@ornl.gov 

Prepared using sagej.cls [Version: 2017/01/17 v1.20]

encompassed 24 application projects in areas including national security, energy, Earth systems, economic security, materials, and data science, along with six co-design centers developing high-level libraries used by multiple ECP applications. The AD effort was supported by a Software Technologies (ST) component comprising 70 unique software products developed by 35 teams spanning programming models and runtimes, math libraries, data and visualization, and development tools. A survey of the ECP AD and ST project teams by Bernholdt et al. (2020) found that, overall, 93% of ECP projects planned to use MPI in their software products. Results like these illustrate the prominence of MPI in the CSE community and more specifically in the ECP software ecosystem. They support the early decision by ECP leadership to fund two distinct projects targeting two different MPI implementations as well as the MPI standard: “Exascale MPI”, which focused on the MPICH 5 library, and our “Open MPI for Exascale” project, targeting Open MPI 6. MPICH and Open MPI are two of the most widely used MPI implementations currently available. They are both open source, and one or the other is the basis for the vast majority of (usually proprietary) MPI implementations provided by high-performance computing (HPC) system vendors. (At the time these projects began, the vendors for the initial DOE exascale systems had not yet been selected.) Both projects were tasked not only with enhancing their respective libraries but also working within the broader MPI standards community to enhance the MPI standard itself to better meet the needs of exascale applications and libraries.

The Message Passing Interface (MPI) The MPI Forum 7 was launched in 1991 in response to the growing number of different libraries that were being developed by researchers and HPC system vendors to express an emerging paradigm of programming for distributed-memory parallel computers through the passing of messages between processes on different nodes. The MPI 1.0 standard document (Message Passing Interface Forum (1994)) was released in 1994, and since that time, MPI has been widely adopted by the HPC computational science and engineering community. Continuing work by the community-driven MPI Forum has evolved the MPI standard to address the evolution of both CSE applications and parallel computer hardware. At the start of the ECP, the MPI standard was at version 3.1 (Message Passing Interface Forum (2015)) and efforts targeting a major new release (4.0) had recently begun. MPI 3.1 included point-to-point and one-sided communications, collective operations, and I/O capabilities, and defined a model of process and group creation and management. MPI 4.0 was intended to address emerging challenges including the limitations of the default integer datatypes in C and Fortran to represent quantities needed in modern applications (e.g., > 2 32), better support for the “MPI+X” programming paradigm (where X is a shared-memory programming model such as threads), and a new way to initialize MPI applications, all of which were considered important for exascale applications (Bernholdt et al. (2020)), as well as other improvements.

The Open MPI Library The Open MPI project began in 2004 as the merger of LAM/MPI, FT-MPI, and LA-MPI, with contributions from PACX-MPI, and it has evolved to become one of the most widely used open-source MPI implementations available. Distributed under a permissive BSD license, the development of Open MPI is volunteer-driven, with a core development team that includes researchers and industry representatives. Open MPI closely tracks the MPI standard but also serves as an incubator for many new features and capabilities as they are being developed and refined through discussions of the MPI Forum. It has support for Linux and MacOS operating systems, and most types of hardware (interconnects, CPUs, accelerators) used in current HPC systems.

Goals of the OMPI-X Project The Open MPI for Exascale (OMPI-X) project team included participants from four DOE national laboratories (Oak Ridge, Sandia, Lawrence Livermore, and Los Alamos National Laboratories) and the University of Tennessee -Knoxville, many of whom have been active contributors to both Open MPI and the MPI standard for many years. Recognizing that the DOE national laboratories and users of their computer facilities represent a significant portion of the MPI community who have interests in running at the most extreme scales possible, the overarching goal of the OMPI X project was to represent the interests of these users in both the MPI standards process and the implementation of the Open MPI library. The remainder of the paper discusses the work of the OMPI-X project in more detail, including. Sec. MPI+X presents improvements to support MPI+X programming models, including partitioned communications, user-level threading models, and enhancements to one-sided opera tions. Sec. Sessions describes our work on the Sessions model, to provide more flexible initialization of MPI appli cations. And Sec. Fault Tolerance outlines our work to improve the fault tolerance capabilities of the MPI library. Additionally, Sec. Collective Operations outlines progress on improving the choice of algorithms for collective operations on modern hardware, and Sec. HPE Slingshot-11 Intercon nect Support presents our newly developed support for the network interconnect used on all three of the initial DOE exascale systems. Finally, Sec. Quality Assurance discusses our effort to improve the testing of Open MPI, particularly on platforms of interest to DOE users.

MPI+X “MPI+X” is a colloquial term for multi-level approaches to parallel programming that utilizes MPI for coarser grained distributed-memory style parallelism combined with another programming model for local shared-memory style parallelism within each MPI rank. The OMPI-X project’s efforts focused on X=threading, which is the most common approach for current systems and applications, and which presents challenges for both performance and scalability. This section describes three different efforts to improve MPI+threads support in MPI and Open MPI: helping to

drive the design, standardization, and implementation of the new Partitioned Communications feature of MPI 4.0, generalizing how the Open MPI library interfaces with threads to facilitate the use of user-level threading libraries, and improvements to the scalability and performance of one sided communications in Open MPI in the context of multi threaded applications.

Partitioned Communications Performant multi-threaded communication has been a highly requested feature for MPI (Bernholdt et al. (2020)). Partitioned communication is an attempt to provide this functionality, with a persistent two-sided semantic. Here, we detail the work in designing, modeling, implementing, and evaluating partitioned communication, which became part of the MPI 4.0 standard (Message Passing Interface Forum (2021)). Design Partitioned communication is a new interface for point-to-point communication in MPI initially proposed in Grant et al. (2019). The interface reduces overhead by creating an effective channel where a sender is matched with a receiver at initialization and the information (tag matching, target-buffer, data partitioning) can be reused in a persistent manner. This approach contrasts with persistent point-to point in MPI as that interface is not matched at initialization but rather repeatedly each time start is called. This reduced overhead enables an “early-bird” communi cation pattern, shown in Figure 1. This form of communi cation/computation overlap focuses on sending data when it’s ready, rather than following a bulk-synchronous pat tern. Early-bird communication can be done with traditional point-to-point messaging, but the areas where it is beneficial narrow as per-message overheads increase, thus necessitating a low-overhead interface. Partitioned communication requires four types of func tions. Initialization is the first function in the form of MPI Psend init and MPI Precv init. These func tions create the request defining buffer, tag, destination, num ber of partitions, and partition size. MPI Start is used to activate the requests, but unlike in persistent communication does not indicate that data is ready to be sent. MPI Pready and MPI Parrived set and check the active status of individual partitions, with the former allowing MPI to send data. MPI Wait or MPI Test will check the completion of the entire request and indicate completion only if every partition has been completed. Model and Benchmark One potential benefit of partitioned communication is that it enables part (or even most) of a message buffer to be sent well in advance of the point at which the entire buffer is ready to be sent. This early bird transmission of message contents has the potential to improve the overall communication performance of important applications. However, the potential benefit of early-bird transmission of message partitions is dependent on: the number and size of each partition, the times when each partition is complete and ready to be sent, and the system’s network performance characteristics. To advance our understanding of how the complex rela tionship between these three factors affect the performance benefit of early-bird sends in partitioned communication, we developed an abstract model, based on the LogGP network model, see Alexandrov et al. (1995); Culler et al. (1993), and a complementary benchmark to gather empirical data. The LogGP communication model is a member of a family of abstract communication models. This model describes the time required for point-to-point communication as a function of six variables: (i) k, number of bytes to send; (ii) L, latency for sending the message between processes; (iii) o, processor time required to send or receive a message; (iv) g, minimum time between consecutive messages; (v) G, time to send one byte; and (vi) P, number of processors in the system. Figure 2 depicts how our model can be applied to predict the time required to send back-to-back k-byte messages from a Sender to a Receiver. Figure 3 provides a simple illustration of how our model can be applied to traditional communication (all partitions are sent when the last partition is ready) and early-bird communication (partitions are sent as they complete). In Schonbein et al. (2023), we used our model to explore the impact of various partition completion timing scenarios and to identify trends in communication behavior based on factors such as overall message size and delay between actor completions. We evaluated the benchmarks on three systems utilizing distinct network technologies. The results of our experiments and showed that: (i) smaller numbers of elements can extract most of the benefit of early-bird communication, (ii) the performance benefit will depend non-trivially on application behavior, and (iii) benefits are highly network-dependent. Implementations Three implementations of partitioned communications have seen some contribution from the OMPI-X project. The MPI RMA (remote memory access) implementation is a separate library that interfaces with MPI. This implementation was featured in the original paper (Grant et al. (2019)) but has since been extended and optimized to better match the specification. This implementation has a notable limitation. Since it was built on RMA windows, the creation of which is a blocking collective operation, the MPI Psend init and MPI Precv init operations become blocking in this implementation, which is not compliant with the MPI specification. The second implementation is MPIPCL developed by the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga and Auburn University in collaboration with the OMPI-X project and described by Worley et al. (2021). This version is also a separate library that uses the MPI Persistent point-to-point interface. This implementation provides a more compliant version of the partitioned communication interface, including non-blocking initialization calls, but sacrifices some performance due to the use of two-sided network calls. Finally, we developed the initial Open MPI implementa tion, which has been released with Open MPI 5.0.0. This implementation, described by Marts et al. (2023b), is similar to MPIPCL, in that it sits on top of the persistent point-to point communication interface. This implementation allows full compliance with the specification and portability to any network interconnect supported by Open MPI. The integra tion within the Open MPI library opens the possibility of using network-specific optimizations as well.

Thread #1 Arrival

Partitioned Send Timeline

Thread #1 Data Transfer

Thread #2 Arrival

Thread #2 Data Transfer

Thread #3 Arrival

Thread #3 Data Transfer

Thread #4 Arrival

Thread #4 Data Transfer

Thread #1 Arrival

Traditional Single Threaded Send Timeline

Thread #1 Data Transfer

Thread #2 Arrival

Thread #2 Data Transfer

Thread #3 Arrival

Thread #3 Data Transfer

Thread #4 Arrival

Thread #4 Data Transfer

All threads have joined and send call is issued

Figure 1. Early-bird communication os G(k − 1) os

g

G(k − 1)

L

or or

Sender

Receiver

Figure 2. A demonstration of the LogGP communication model can be applied to predict the time required to send back-to-back k-byte messages from Sender to Receiver.

·· ··

os G(4b − 1)

L or

Sender

ReceiverT

·· ··

os G(b − 1)

L or

os G(b − 1)

L or

os G(b − 1)

L or

os G(b − 1)

L or

Sender

ReceiverE

t0 tN− 1

δ

Figure 3. An example of how the extended LogGP model can be applied to traditional communication (top row) and partitioned communication with early-bird sends (bottom row).

Runtime Optimization The space of potential optimizations for partitioned communication is large. In Dosanjh et al. (2021), we evaluated the choice of the underlying messaging implementation using the MPI RMA and MPIPCL library implementations. This study revealed an interesting trade off: the RMA-based one-sided implementation was more performant in cases where one receive partition is used while the persistent two-sided implementation is more performant in situations where knowing a partition has arrived early is useful. This result suggests that the ability to have the underlying mechanism determined at runtime on a per-peer basis may be a useful enhancement to explore in the future.

Potential Impacts A number of studies have demonstrated the benefits of partitioned communications in different appli cation scenarios. Marts, et al., Marts et al. (2023a) explored the potential for early-bird communication to benefit sev eral proxy applications (MiniFE, MiniMD, and MiniQMC). Early-bird communication is a technique to boost com munication/computation overlap by combining fine-grained communication with partitioned communication. Though all three applications are quite different in nature, both MiniFE and MiniQMC show benefits from the early-bird commu nication strategy, while MiniMD does not. More generally, Marts, et al. Marts et al. (2024) used the Configurable Messaging Benchmark (CMB) to explore a wider range of communication characteristics and find that for applications with sufficiently large transfers, partitioned communications can be beneficial. Additionally, ongoing discussion in the MPI Forum highlights the potential use of partitioned com munication in applications that will use GPU-driven commu nication.

User-Level Threading Support

Traditionally, the POSIX threads (pthreads) API has been the substrate upon which many shared memory programming model implementations, such as OpenMP runtime libraries, have been based. The pthreads API is also used directly by some applications. However, other threading models are also now available, including more lightweight options like user-level threading (ULT) libraries. Such libraries typically create long-lived OS threads to execute ephemeral tasks. Tasks in ULT libraries often have much smaller associated stacks than pthreads and omit features like signal vectors, lowering the overhead of task management and context switching. Figure 4 illustrates this advantage through measurements of the time required for fork, join, and yield operations in qthreads (Wheeler et al. (2008)), Argobots (Seo et al. (2018)), HPX (Kaiser et al. (2020)) versus pthreads and C++ std::async implemented using pthreads. Due to its ubiquity, pthreads has been used in the threading layer of Open MPI, which requires the management of threads to perform various tasks in its implementation. However, calling pthreads functions from Open MPI directly limited extensibility, precluding the use of alternate threading models such as ULT libraries. Several motivating factors led us to refactor Open MPI’s threading layer. First, using ULT libraries in the Open MPI threading layer could

Figure 4. Execution time cost of fork-join and yield operations in different threading libraries. Results were obtained on an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Gold 6430 CPU using GCC 11, 65536 tasks, and 128 yields resulting in 8.3 million context swaps.

void sender_task(task_args_t * args) { MPI_Request req; MPI_Isend(args->send_data, 1, MPI_INT, args->target, 0, comm, &req) MPI_Wait(&req, MPI_STATUS_IGNORE);

} 
void recv_task(task_args_t * args) { 
MPI_Request req; 
MPI_Irecv(args->recv_data, 1, MPI_INT, 
args->target, 0, comm, &req) 
MPI_Wait(&req, MPI_STATUS_IGNORE); 
} 
... 
spawn_task(sender_task, task_args); 
spawn_task(recv_task, task_args); 
... 

Figure 5. Example code of a conforming task-parallel application with two independent tasks showing a potential dead-lock depending on the execution order of both tasks and the number of available worker threads (<2).

bring potential performance benefits from decreased thread management overheads and/or overlap of computation and communication if threads waiting for data yield to the threading runtime. Second, because many ULTs rely on cooperative execution, the use of cooperative threads in the MPI runtime as well as the end user’s code may be required for application progress. Listing in Figure 5 shows an example code that requires cooperative threading behavior with MPI. The code refactoring, now included in Open MPI 5.0, abstracts calls to the threading layer, separating the interface and implementation within the code and increasing modularity (Evans et al. (2020)). Other areas of the Open MPI code base already had similar requirements, satisfied by its Modular Component Architecture (MCA) (M. Squyres and Lumsdaine (2005)). We extended the Open, Portable Access Layer (OPAL) MCA to define threading layer functions such as thread management, synchronization, and thread-specific data. Code within the Open MPI implementation calling pthreads functions directly was changed to instead call functions in the OPAL threading interface, e.g., opal thread join() rather than pthread join(). In addition to a pthreads implementation of the OPAL threading functions, two ULT implementations were added, one for Argobots and one for qthreads. The choice of threading implementation can now be specified when configuring an installation of Open MPI. This development complements the Argobots support in the MPICH library (Lu et al. (2015)), MPICH support for qthreads is also implemented but awaiting review to merge into the code base. Thus both major MPI implementations can make use of ULT libraries as threading layers. The availability of ULT support in Open MPI itself enables new avenues for optimization, such as strategies to efficiently schedule lightweight threads generated in MPI and the application. The new OPAL MCA threading interface also allows for the addition of still more threading models in the future.

Enhancements to One-Sided Communications As part of the OMPI-X project, we also strove to improve the performance of MPI one-sided operations (also known as remote memory access, or RMA), particularly for the case of multi-threaded applications making use of MPI RMA (Hjelm et al. (2018)). Among the improvements made to improve the scalability and performance of Open MPI’s support for MPI RMA were: • Introduction of a shared memory store for any RMA memory handles required by the lower level network API to support RMA, • implementation of two algorithms for a more scalable MPI WIN LOCK ALL implementation; and • Infrastructure to support mapping individual threads within an MPI process to separate underlying network contexts for those lower-level network APIs that expose such contexts. This work was carried out at an early stage of the ECP project and has been available in Open MPI releases since 2.0.0.

Sessions 
The Sessions model for initializing MPI (Holmes et al. 
(2016)) was incorporated, partly by efforts of the OMPI 
X team, in the MPI-4.0 standard (Message Passing 
Interface Forum (2021)). Sessions seeks to address several 
shortcomings of the world model (use of MPI Init and 
MPI Finalize) including: 
1. MPI cannot be initialized more than once, 
2. MPI cannot be reinitialized after MPI Finalize has 
been called, 
3. MPI cannot be initialized from different application 
components without a priori knowledge or coordina 
tion. 
The implementation of Sessions within Open MPI 
required extensive restructuring of the code components 
managing initialization and finalization. The implementation 
relies on features in PMIx to support group construction 

ULFM provides targeted interfaces to empower recovery strategies with adequate options to restore communication capabilities and global consistency, at the necessary levels only. CONTINUE ACROSS ERRORS In ULFM, failures do not alter the state of MPI communicators. Point-to-point operations can continue undisturbed between non-faulty processes. ULFM imposes no recovery cost on simple communication patterns that can proceed despite failures. EXCEPTIONS IN CONTAINED DOMAINS A process can use MPI_[Comm,Win,File]_revoke to propagate an error notification on the entire group, and could, for example, interrupt other ranks to join a coordinated recovery.

FULL-CAPABILITY RECOVERY Allowing collective communication on damaged MPI communicators would add fault-free overhead. Instead, the MPI_Comm_shrink routine builds a replacement communicator -excluding failed processes— that can be used to resume collective communication, spawn replacement processes, and rebuild RMA windows and files.

Master W1 W2 Wn

Send (W1,T1) Submit T1 Send (W2,T1) Resubmit Recv (ANY) Detected W1

Recv(P1): failure P2 calls Revoke P1 P2 P3 Pn

Recv(P1) Recv(P1): revoked

P1 P2 P3 Pn

Figure 6. ULFM enables the deployment of varied application recovery strategies, thanks to its granular control over the recovery of the MPI communication capabilities.

(Castain et al. (2018)). The concept of an extended communicator ID (exCID) was also introduced to enable the use of PMIX GROUP IDs. Enhancements were later made to PMIx to allow for an alternate mechanism of managing CIDs which should facilitate support for Sessions on additional network fabrics. The implementation and use of Sessions within a multi-physics HPC application are described in Hjelm et al. (2019). Initial support for Sessions is available in the Open MPI 5.0.0 release.

Fault Tolerance Fault tolerance (FT) is crucial to run large-scale jobs. As systems move into the exascale era, failures continue to impact the execution of applications. This section describes two sub-projects that the OMPI-X project conducted to support FT mechanisms in Open MPI and drive the discussion of FT support in the MPI Forum.

User-Level Fault Mitigation The User-Level Fault Mitigation (ULFM) (Bland et al. (2013)) is an extension of the MPI standard that enables applications to recover from process failures (when an MPI process crashes). In this model, the end goal is to support the deployment of user-directed recovery strategies by providing the means to maintain and recover the MPI capability of performing communication after a failure has occurred. ULFM provides the required MPI APIs to 1) report an error from communication procedures when they cannot respect the specified outcome due to a failure (e.g., the reception buffer does not contain the message), 2) specify the state of the MPI library to enable continued communication between non-failed processes for operations that do not involve failed processes, and 3) create repaired MPI handles, like communicators, that restore the capability of performing collective operations between the surviving set of processes. Given these capabilities, end-users can choose, as illustrated in Figure 6, to continue point-to-point communication between surviving processes, a very cheap and effective recovery strategy when the application is amenable (like in stencil and job-stealing applications (Gamell et al. (2017); Ali et al. (2016))), or repair the communication infrastructure to its full capabilities, in turn empowering the end-user to create code that spawns replacement MPI processes that replace failed processes (using preexisting the MPI spawn operation), exchanging checkpoint data using MPI communication (Gamell et al. (2016)), or recovering the MPI application dataset using application-driven data protection methods (e.g., ABFT (Bouteiller et al. (2015))). Additional Fault-Tolerance Capabilities The scope for which an error is reported (that is, should an error be produced only when the communication peer has failed, or when any peer has failed) has implications in terms of the recovery strategies that can be expressed. To support the case of fail-through applications, the error reporting must be limited to only communication with failed processes, as the intention is to continue communicating between non failed processes without incurring the cost of recovering the whole communication infrastructure. In contrast, the expression of codes that undergo an essentially collective recovery procedure requires that errors that are reported only locally be propagated. The MPIX Comm revoke* procedure lets the end-user propagate the effect of local errors to the whole scope of the communicator (interrupting all communication on that communicator with a specific error code). A remaining difficulty in that case lies with applications that are subdivided into multiple components each using their own communicators. Explicit use of the revoke operation on communicators that belong to another level of the software hierarchy is impractical and undesirable. Thus, as an alternative we expanded the control of error reporting scope (Bouteiller and Bosilca (2022)), and made them user-controllable. The user can supply info keys attached to communicators to control whether errors are 1) reported only when the communication peer has failed, 2) when any peer in the communicator has failed (regardless of when that peer is involved in the communication at hand), or 3) if any peer has failed in the application. Enabling group based error reporting has no impact on performance. In addition, we designed a new MPIX Session revoke operation that enables the bulk interruption of all communication started from a particular software layer. By exposing its session handle, a software component or library can provide a handle that lets the caller notify the library that errors need to be recovered without requiring knowledge of internal implementation details (like communicator handles) used within the library. We also added user-controllable uniformity for error reporting. Consider the case of a collective communication during which a process fails. For some of the processes, the operation may appear to be successful, for example, in a broadcast, if a process has received the message sent by the root, the procedure has met its process-local specification, even though other processes may have failed to receive the message. This can result in non-uniform error reporting, that is, the same collective procedure call may have a different error outcome at different MPI processes. We studied the addition of a fault-tolerant agreement operation within the collective that forces the error reporting to be uniform and ∗We use the MPIX prefix to denote functions that are not currently part of the MPI standard.

evaluated the cost of enabling this feature on a variety of collective communication patterns (Bouteiller and Bosilca (2022)).

CHECKPOINT SIZE (Bytes)

Combined Checkpoint Reload + IShrink Checkpoint Reload Only

0.01

0.1

1

10

100

1000

10000

1 4 16 64 256 1K 4K 16K 64K 256K 1M 4M 16M 64M256M

Overlap Between Reloading Buddy Checkpointing and MPI IShrink Recovery

Figure 7. The ISHRINK operation enables the overlap of the communication infrastructure with the recovery of user data (768 ranks, 64 nodes, Infiniband QDR).

Finally, we designed a non-blocking variant for the agreement operation used to shrink communicators (MPIX Comm ishrink). This algorithm enables the execution of the shrink operation in the background, so that the application may repair its own state concurrently to repairing the state of MPI, or repair multiple communicators in bulk at a reduced cost (Figure 7). Implementation and Application Impact These features are implemented in the Open MPI version 5.0.0 release and are under active consideration to be adopted into the MPI standard (with the error reporting and interruption APIs

Allreduce

Gather Alltoall

PingPing

PingPong

Reduce

Sendrecv

0.20.40.60.81.01.2

Bcast

4 Bytes 
16 KBytes 
128 KBytes 
1 MBytes 

Figure 8. ULFM enables resilient operation without incurring any noticeable overhead on raw communication performance. The graph shows FT performance relative to no-FT performance on the NERSC Cori system with 4375 MPI processes. No-FT = 1, lower is better.

already accepted). We evaluated the cost of general ULFM fault tolerance, comparing the performance between micro benchmarks with fault-tolerance enabled and without, when group error reporting scope is enabled, and with error uniformity. Overall the measured performance (Figure 8) demonstrates that advanced fault-tolerance capabilities can be implemented without incurring noticeable overhead on the communication performance with HPC networks, as the difference is withing the natural 20% variability of the benchmarks (sometimes to the advantage of the fault tolerant approach, AlltoAll results only present latency results due to memory size limitation on the test system). ULFM has a long history of being used by research groups to deploy their resilience strategies (Losada et al. (2020)), with several dozen applications using ULFM. In Whitlock et al. (2022), we demonstrated the integration of multiple applications, notably with Fenix as the user-facing recovery framework, Kokkos for control-flow resilience, and VeloC for data resilience, with ULFM providing failure detection and communication system recovery. This work demonstrated how implementing resilience with this system is minimally invasive to the application code, and updates to customize for specific application or platform features are simplified by exposing the integration of these runtimes to the application. In Li et al. (2023), we studied how we can recover machine learning applications that are reliant on accelerator based communication for performance, such as Horovod. We designed an original multi-step recovery procedure that employs the NCCL communication library before faults occur, uses ULFM to detect failures, completes the current batch using ULFM while NCCL is inoperative after a failure, and finally repairs NCCL and rebalances the application workload when reaching a natural boundary in the algorithm. Thanks to deploying ULFM run-through-based recovery for the inner iterations, the high cost of repairing the NCCL infrastructure and rebalancing the model is delayed to a later point where rebalancing is a natural part of the model training, henceforth drastically reducing the cost of malleable operation.

Reinit The global-restart fault-tolerance model—also known as Reinit—has been proposed as an efficient model to survive failures in MPI bulk synchronous applications (Gamell et al. (2014); Chakraborty et al. (2018); Georgakoudis et al. (2020); Parasyris et al. (2021)). Reinit global-restart aims at reducing the failure recovery time for bulk-synchronous applications that rely on synchronous checkpoint/restart, the most common fault-tolerance method in these applications. The key idea behind Reinit is to provide a simple yet powerful mechanism for restoring the application state, following a failure, to a previous consistent state and then resume computation from that state. In Reinit, applications do not need to perform steps to detect and propagate failures, and to recover MPI state (e.g., communicators); these steps are performed by external components, e.g., the MPI library or the resource manager. Once a failure is detected, the application restores to an MPI state that is similar to the state after MPI Init.

Reinit’s Interface A key idea in Reinit is that the paral lel job is not terminated, but instead, MPI returns to a consistent state with a valid MPI COMM WORLD commu nicator (the trivial communicators MPI COMM SELF and MPI COMM NULL are valid too). The world communica tor comprises the same number of processes and ranks as before the failure, by having the MPI runtime library re spawn failed processes due to a process or node failure. This method enables several optimizations that can signif icantly reduce recovery time from a failure, by avoiding job/resource allocation time, enabling the reuse of existing process connections unaffected by the failure, avoiding re initializing application data for survivor processes, enabling faster loading of application checkpoints on MPI process by re-using in-memory data structures while cooperating with multi-level checkpointing strategies (see Figure 9). Using Reinit involves adding a call to the MPIX Reinit procedure after MPI Init and any application-specific initialization that reads, but does not create, new MPI state. MPIX Reinit receives a resilient entry point function, e.g., resilient foo, that contains the computational loops, the logic to load and store checkpoints for recovering the application state, and re-creating any additional MPI state after recovery.

Wait for others Initialize

Process 0 state=New

Finalize Initialize

Process 1 state=New

Finalize Initialize

Process 2 state=New

Finalize Initialize

Process 3 state=New

Restart

X

Out-of-band Failure Notification state= Reinited state= Reinited state= Reinited

state= Respawned Figure 9. Execution flow of Reinit. Initially, all processes have NEW state. After a failure, the state is either REINITED, for surviving processes, or RESPAWNED, for processes that have been added to replace failed processes.

Implementation and Results Implementing Reinit in Open MPI required various extensions to the Open MPI’s runtime system. The current work was done with Open MPI 4.0.0. The Reinit implementation extended Open MPI to provide the function MPIX Reinit. Our approach extends the ORTE (open run-time environment) component of Open MPI to propagate fault notifications from daemons

Reinit ++ : Global-Restart Recovery for MPI Fault Tolerance 549 extensions noticeably increase the original application execution time. However, it is inconclusive whether this is a result of the tested prototype implementation or a systemic trade-off. Next, we compare the MPI recovery times among all the approaches.

(a) CoMD (b) HPCCG (c) LULESH Fig. 6. Scaling of MPI recovery time recovering from a process failure

5.3 Comparing MPI Recovery Time Recovering from a Process Failure Though checkpointing saves application’s computation time, reducing MPI recovery time saves overhead from restarting. This overhead is increasingly important the larger the deployment and the higher the fault rate. In partic ular, Fig. 6 shows the scaling of time required for MPI recovery across all pro grams and recovery approaches, again removing any overhead for checkpointing to focus on the MPI recovery time. As expected, MPI recovery time depends only on the number of ranks, thus times are similar among different programs for the same recovery approach. Commenting on scaling, CR and Reinit ++ scale excellently, requiring almost constant time for MPI recovery regardless the num ber of ranks. However, CR is about 6× slower, requiring around 3 s to tear down execution and re-deploy the application, whereas Reinit ++ requires about 0.5 s to propagate the fault, re-initialize survivor processes and re-spawn the failed process. ULFM has on par recovery time with Reinit ++ up to 64 ranks, but then its time increases being up to 3× slower than Reinit ++ for 1024 ranks. ULFM

(a) CoMD (b) HPCCG (c) LULESH Figure 10. Fig. 7. Results showing MPI recovery time when a node Scaling of MPI recovery time recovering from a node failure failure occurs, contrasting Reinit versus Checkpoint-Restart (CR) while scaling the number of ranks (16 ranks per node).

to the root and to implement the mechanism of MPI recovery on detecting a fault. Also, Reinit extends OPAL (the Open Portable Access Layer) to implement low-level process signaling for notifying survivor process to roll back execution to the resilient function. Figure 10 shows indicative results comparing the MPI recovery time of Reinit to typical checkpoint/restart (CR) for three HPC proxy applications (CoMD, HPCG, LULESH). Reinit recovers up to 6× faster compared to checkpoint/restart and scales excellently as the number of ranks increases, showcasing the performance benefit of mending an application without having to go through lengthy resource reallocation and MPI bootstrapping. The Reinit model is under discussion in the Fault Tolerance Working Group to be included in future versions of the MPI Standard; the current challenges for inclusion in the standard include allowing a change of control flow when MPI is restarted without causing memory leaks, and allowing Reinit in the sessions model.

Collective Operations Collective operations are an important aspect of distributed scientific and engineering applications. Open MPI provides implementations of various algorithms for different MPI collective operations. The OMPI-X project has worked to improve the algorithms used in Open MPI to select the collective implementation to use in different contexts, helped improve shared memory collectives, and proposed a new synchronization capability for MPI to improve (among other things) the accuracy of benchmarks used to tune the collective selection algorithms.

Algorithm Selection in Shared Memory The coll/tuned collective component in Open MPI is designed to select an implementation for a given configuration, i.e., based on the operation, the communicator size, and the data size the component selects the algorithm to execute (Pjesivac-Grbovi ˇ c et al. ´ (2007)). The coll/han component, on the other hand, splits collective operations into inter- and intra-node operations (Luo et al. (2020)). It uses the existing collective components such as coll/tuned to select the best algorithms for both phases. The generic heuristic for selecting implementations can never guarantee an optimal choice but instead is a best-effort approach. During our work on coll/han we noticed that the limited information used as input to the heuristic may lead to algorithm choices that are far from optimal on shared memory communicators. We performed experiments to determine the discrepancy of best algorithm selection on two systems available at the time: Summit 8, installed at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, and Hawk 9, installed at HLRS in Stuttgart, Germany with a CPU configuration similar to the Frontier exascale system at ORNL. Based on our observations we extended the selection logic of coll/tuned to include information about the communicator topology and introduced a modified selection heuristic for shared memory communicators. Figure 11 shows the difference between our shared-memory aware algorithm selection heuristic and the default selection in coll/tuned on Hawk for MPI Allgather. Especially

2 4 8 16 32 64 80 96 112 128 Number of Processes

0 
1 
2 
4 
8 
16 
32 
64 
128 
256 
512 
1024 
2048 
4096 
8192 
16384 
32768 
65536 
131072 
262144 
524288 
1048576 

S i z e

3.60% 3.38% 3.96% 0.14% 0.94% 1.20% 1.57% 0.43% 0.50% 0.41% 63.56% 49.08% 40.43% 45.82% 46.87% 52.79% 47.63% 31.07% 0.50% 19.99% 64.26% 40.24% 40.35% 45.03% 47.02% 51.54% 48.15% 31.48% 9.02% 25.46% 64.29% 37.83% 38.55% 44.56% 45.89% 54.43% 51.63% 38.93% 17.41% 24.41% 62.45% 36.23% 40.06% 47.95% 52.41% 57.59% 53.46% 44.36% 32.97% 25.05% 63.22% 35.13% 36.24% 50.34% 52.13% 57.83% 55.26% 50.12% 41.74% 30.17% 63.10% 33.82% 38.41% 50.26% 50.79% 55.94% 55.20% 53.35% 46.57% 39.38% 62.70% 34.71% 34.32% 49.22% 50.09% 53.63% 56.67% 60.08% 56.21% 49.68% 64.54% 35.54% 34.03% 46.02% 47.57% 51.27% 62.94% 72.34% 69.15% 61.85% 64.47% 30.94% 28.53% 44.66% 48.05% 53.58% 65.90% 75.61% 74.71% 65.62% 62.79% 24.16% 24.07% 50.01% 57.70% 37.07% 28.02% 25.57% 25.56% 28.10% 62.11% 14.29% 26.05% 61.38% 13.71% 5.62% 0.19% 0.92% -0.49% 6.00% 58.57% 1.44% 31.52% 60.64% 0.17% 0.45% -0.01% 0.10% -0.36% 1.08% 53.98% -0.16% 32.78% 61.37% 6.70% 0.00% 3.93% 7.78% 14.38% 25.01% 44.01% -0.49% 43.88% 63.23% 3.90% 0.54% 4.19% -1.63% 4.45% -0.83% 12.93% -0.20% 48.13% 63.38% -1.49% 0.21% 7.39% 2.99% 1.26% -0.79% 10.50% 0.64% 48.69% 58.02% 8.83% 0.18% 0.34% -1.33% 0.95% 0.49% 2.83% -0.59% 43.74% 50.80% -0.70% -0.60% 0.46% 1.71% 1.90% 0.80% 14.25% 4.34% 44.38% 54.08% 26.42% 0.03% 0.30% 0.19% -0.07% 0.25% -3.05% 0.91% 49.69% 66.63% 25.98% -0.19% 0.00% 0.12% 0.76% 3.12% -1.52% 2.33% 53.98% 65.76% 26.48% 0.07% 0.17% -0.01% 0.18% 2.65% -0.06% 2.50% 54.90% 65.13% 26.79% 0.13% -0.02% -0.00% 0.05% -6.67%

Allgather on 1 nodes (core ranking), diff to default

Figure 11. Percent speedup of different algorithm selections over the newly tuned default selection for MPI Allgather on a single node (gray means the default is close to the best selection; darker blue means lower latencies could be possible with a different selection). Measurements were performed on the Hawk system at HLRS.

for small and medium-sized data sizes, the difference is pronounced, reaching a speedup of up to 75%. We have observed similar effects for other collective operations. On Summit the effects were less pronounced due to the smaller number of cores.

Shared Memory Collectives Module

As an extension of the work discussed above, we developed a new implementation of the coll/sm shared memory collective component within Open MPI. The existing component used explicit transfer buffers between processes in shared memory, which required two explicit memory copy operations per transfer. The new coll/smdirect component relies on the XPMEM kernel module 10 to share data buffers between processes and avoid multiple memory copy operations. In our implementation, processes expose the operation’s input memory regions to a limited set of peer processes through XPMEM, and atomic variables are used to signal the availability of data. Generally, processes are arranged in a binary tree, structured such that collectives require O(log(n)) steps to complete. Depending on the characteristics of the operation data travels either up the tree (e.g., MPI Reduce) or down the tree (e.g., MPI Bcast). Non-rooted collectives (MPI Allreduce, MPI Barrier) perform both an up and down traversal of the tree. The performance of our proof-of-concept was encour aging but pointed to some deficiencies. Most notably, our implementation was missing support for NUMA systems and an eager protocol, which would benefit small data sizes. Figure 12 depicts results for different collective operations using the OSU benchmark suite 11, comparing our imple mentation (coll/smdirect, blue) against the default collective component (coll/tuned, red) and the legacy shared memory collective component (coll/sm, green). Each figure provides three lines for each implementation: the minimum reported latency (dotted lines), the mean latency (dashed lines), and the maximum latency (solid lines).

16 128 1024 8192 65536 524288 Transfer Size [B]

10 1

100

101

102

reduce on 64 procs (shared memory)

sm (avg) sm (min) sm (max) smdirect (avg) smdirect (min) smdirect (max) tuned (avg) tuned (min) tuned (max)

(a) MPI Reduce

0 4 32 256 2048 16384 131072 1048576 Transfer Size [B]

100

101

102

103

bcast on 64 procs (shared memory)

sm (avg) sm (min) sm (max) smdirect (avg) smdirect (min) smdirect (max) tuned (avg) tuned (min) tuned (max)

(b) MPI Bcast

16 128 1024 8192 65536 524288 Transfer Size [B]

101

102

103

104

allreduce on 64 procs (shared memory)

sm (avg) sm (min) sm (max) smdirect (avg) smdirect (min) smdirect (max) tuned (avg) tuned (min) tuned (max)

(c) MPI Allreduce

Figure 12. Comparison between coll/sm, coll/smdirect, and coll/tuned for different MPI collective operations on 64 nodes on Hawk.

For MPI Reduce (Figure 12a), both coll/sm and coll/tuned provide significantly lower minimum laten cies for small data sizes due to fact that they implement an eager protocol. Throughout most of the data size range, the maximum latency of coll/smdirect is compara ble to coll/tuned while the legacy coll/sm shows a significant slow-down due to the additional data movement required by the two step process.

For MPI Bcast (Figure 12b), our proof-of-concept yields significantly lower latencies than the other two implementations for larger messages, but shows higher latencies for small messages, owing to the lack of an eager protocol. A somewhat similar picture emerges for the non-rooted MPI Allreduce (Figure 12c) where coll/smdirect shows performance competitive with coll/tuned.

Katevenis et al. (2022) built on this proof-of-concept to develop the XPMEM-based Hierarchical Collectives (XHC) framework, which adds awareness of the NUMA topology to further improve performance. XHC has been proposed

for inclusion in Open MPI 12 and we are working with the developers on the integration.

Improved MPI Support for Benchmarking Collective algorithm selection heuristics comprise a decision tree that is built based on performance data obtained using standard benchmark software such as OSU micro benchmarks, Intel MPI Benchmarks (IMB) 13, and LLNL’s mpiBench 14. These benchmarks make assumptions about the ability of MPI Barrier to provide proper synchronization. However, the MPI standard makes no guarantees about the quality of synchronization provided by this operation. Unfortunately, a closer analysis by Schuchart et al. (2023) has shown that the choice of barrier algorithm impacts the benchmark result of the collective operation under test. To address this issue, we developed a proposal to integrate a way to synchronize MPI processes in time. The proposed procedure, MPIX Harmonize, makes a best-effort attempt to release all processes at the same point in time to ensure that any subsequent application (e.g., benchmark) region is entered at the same time by all processes. This strategy ensures that the arrival pattern created by the algorithm used to implement the barrier does not impact the benchmark result of the collective under test. The details and early results of this proposal are provided in Schuchart et al. (2023). This functionality will be proposed for inclusion into the MPI standard to lay the groundwork for more reliable benchmark results and by extension more accurate algorithm selection heuristics.

HPE Slingshot-11 Interconnect Support Slingshot-11 (SS-11) is the name for a new high performance network interconnect developed by HPE for their Cray EX series systems. As such, the SS-11 interconnect is used on all three of the DOE exascale systems, as well as Perlmutter 15 at the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. The system vendor provides support for Slingshot-11 via a libfabric communication provider (CXI), which supports communication using data residing in either host (CPU) or device (GPU) memory buffers. While Open MPI had support for libfabric, additional work was needed to ensure SS-11-based systems worked well given their more complex node topologies and newer GPU devices. The Frontier system at Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility (OLCF) was the first DOE exascale system to use the Slingshot 11 network in production. The node architecture is more complex than previous machines, with four AMD GPUs and two AMD CPUs per compute node. While processes can access any GPU and network interface on a compute node, the hardware topology is structured so that an MPI process on a given CPU has a greater affinity to one GPU and one network device. This affinity can greatly impact the latency and bandwidth performance of MPI communication. Open MPI was enhanced to make more informed decisions on network selection based on the CPU process bindings defined at process launch time. The runtime layer was updated to allow for indirect launching via mpirun that uses the native SLURM launcher to both bootstrap runtime daemons and set a Virtual Network Identifier (VNI) key to allow clients to access the Slingshot fabric. The Matching Transport Layer (MTL) framework in Open MPI allows for direct use of the libfabric tagged message interface, which is used for point-to-point and collective communication. The MTL path is limited to single module selection, which posed a challenge when using libfabric because only one provider could be selected/active at a time (e.g., Slingshot/CXI or SharedMemory/SHM). To remedy this situation, we developed a new libfabric provider called LINKx that allows for joining the CXI and SHM providers into a single provider (Shehata et al. (2024); Pritchard et al. (2023)). The LINKx provider maintains peer locality and selects the appropriate underlying provider based on the source/destination (i.e., intra-node communication selects SHM and off-node selects CXI). The point-to-point bi-directional bandwidth between host memory buffers on two nodes of Frontier is shown in Figure 13. This shows Open MPI is performing slightly under the vendor provided MPI, but has a similar pattern. Figure 14 shows that on-node point-to-point also tracks the vendor MPI performance for device-to-device transfers using shared-memory via the MTL path. Figure 14 also demonstrates the benefit of using the LINKx provider for the MTL path in Open MPI, where the libfabric shared-memory (SHM) module selected for on-node transfer in contrast to the lower performance when using just CXI (ompi-d2d nolinkx-cxi).

1248163264 128 256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 131072 262144 524288 1048576 2097152 4194304 Size

0

5000

10000

15000

20000

25000

30000

35000

ompi-h2h cray-h2h ompi-h2h-nolinkx-cxi fozzie.ornl.gov osu_bibw.csv fozzie

Figure 13. Frontier: Inter-node point-to-point bi-directional bandwidth osu bibw (HH)

The other DOE systems will be able to leverage the early work done to bring Open MPI up on Frontier. The libfabric enhancements will be useful on all the Slingshot-11 systems. The El Capitan system at LLNL will be very similar to the configuration used on Frontier, also using AMD GPUs, and should be well-supported by the work done for Frontier. The Perlmutter system at NERSC uses NVIDIA GPUs, which have been well-supported in Open MPI for some time, and preliminary testing suggests that the library is working there. The Aurora system at ANL uses Intel GPUs, which are new

1248163264 128 256 512 1024 2048 4096 8192 16384 32768 65536 131072 262144 524288 1048576 2097152 4194304 Size

0

20000

40000

60000

80000

100000

ompi-d2d cray-d2d ompi-d2d-nolinkx-cxi ompi-d2d-nolinkx-shm fozzie.ornl.gov osu_bibw.csv fozzie

Figure 14. Frontier: Intra-node point-to-point bi-directional bandwidth osu bibw (DD)

to Open MPI. We expect that the port will be straightforward once we are able to get access to the system.

Quality Assurance The three major areas of focus for the quality assurance component of the OMPI-X project were: • Enhancements to the Open MPI community MPI Testing Tool (MTT) (Hursey et al. (2007)) to improve its usability on DOE exascale systems; • Leverage ECP GitLab-focused continuous integra tion/continuous deployment (CI/CD) efforts to allow for CI testing of pull requests (PRs) targeting the community Open MPI repository on GitHub 16; and • Testing of Spack 17-based deployments of Open MPI using compilers and variants expected to be commonly used on DOE exascale systems. Although the Open MPI community had been using variants of MTT for many years prior to the ECP project, it was not easy to deploy on typical DOE HPC facilities. The primary obstacle to its use on such systems owed to the fact that for some phases of testing, access to the Internet was needed to obtain nightly source code downloads and other build dependencies, while other phases of testing needed to be carried out on a system’s compute nodes. The ability to run the tool in a split-phase approach was limited. As part of OMPI-X work, MTT was refactored to support checkpointing of its internal database using Python pickle files. This approach allowed for relatively straightforward deployment of the tool on the OLCF crusher and ALCF sunspot systems. The Open MPI community runs many CI tests against PRs opened against branches in the Open MPI repository on GitHub. Setting up CI tests that build and run Open MPI with the changes proposed in a PR on a DOE HPC system presents many challenges. Before the ECP project, some CI testing involving only compilation was carried out on systems at NERSC and Los Alamos National Laboratory. Problems with the reliable availability of these platforms for even this level of testing led to pushback from the community, as PR validation could be held up for days until one of the test platforms would come back online. Consequently, automated CI testing on DOE HPC platforms was disabled. We hoped that the developing ECP Gitlab CI/CD infrastructure could be leveraged for CI testing of PRs opened against the Open MPI GitHub repository. Unfortunately, this proved not to be the case. The basic problem is that although Gitlab has extensive support via Runners to carry out CI on DOE HPC systems, there is no ability at the time of this writing to update PRs with testing results on an external repo not involving branches existing on that external repo. The ECP Gitlab CI/CD infrastructure did, however, prove useful for nightly testing of Spack builds of Open MPI development and release branches.

Summary The MPI standard and its implementations are central to DOE-supported computational science and engineering (CSE) research on HPC systems. In this paper, we have outlined the work of the Open MPI for Exascale (OMPI X) project, which was tasked as part of the Exascale Computing Project with working with the MPI and broader HPC communities to prepare both the MPI standard and its implementation in Open MPI to support the needs of CSE applications on emerging exascale computing platforms. The OMPI-X project worked across numerous fronts, improving support for ”MPI+X” programming models, and helping to introduce new Sessions approach to the initialization of MPI applications, both of which resulted in significant capabilities being added to the MPI standard as well as new features and improvements in performance and scalability in the Open MPI library. We have driven forward capabilities for fault tolerance (some of which have been adopted into the standard, others which are under consideration), and enhanced Open MPI’s collective operations to better support exascale architectures. And we also added support for the new Slingshot-11 high-speed interconnect, which is used on all three of the DOE’s initial exascale systems, and worked to improve testing and quality assurance of the Open MPI library for DOE HPC platforms.

Acknowledgements We express our deep appreciation for all of the members of the OMPI-X project, past and present, and their many contributions to the work of the project. We also express our appreciation to the Open MPI community, for developing and maintaining such a capable library, and for working with us to build upon it. Sandia National Laboratories is a multimission laboratory managed and operated by National Technology and Engineering Solutions of Sandia, LLC., a wholly owned subsidiary of Honeywell International, Inc., for the U.S. Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security Administration under contract DE-NA 0003525. This written work is authored by an employee of NTESS. The employee, not NTESS, owns the right, title and interest in and to the written work and is responsible for its contents. This paper describes objective technical results and analysis. Any subjective views or opinions that might be expressed in the paper do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Department of Energy or the United States Government.

Los Alamos National Laboratory is operated by Triad National Security, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy under contract 89233218CNA000001. This work was performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract DE-AC52-07NA27344. This research used resources of the Argonne Leadership Computing Facility, a U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Science user facility at Argonne National Laboratory and is based on research supported by the U.S. DOE Office of Science-Advanced Scientific Computing Research Program, under Contract No. DE AC02-06CH11357. This research used resources of the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center (NERSC), a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science User Facility using NERSC award DDR ERCAP0026838. This research used resources of the Oak Ridge Leadership Computing Facility, which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility supported under Contract DE-AC05-00OR22725.

Declaration of conflicting interests The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest concerning the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding 
This research was supported by the Exascale Computing Project 
(17-SC-20-SC), a collaborative effort of the U.S. Department 
of Energy Office of Science and the National Nuclear Security 
Administration. 
Notes 
1. https://www.exascaleproject.org/ 
2. https://www.olcf.ornl.gov/olcf-resources/ 
compute-systems/frontier/ 
3. https://www.alcf.anl.gov/aurora 
4. https://asc.llnl.gov/exascale/el-capitan 
5. https://www.mpich.org/ 
6. https://www.open-mpi.org/ 
7. https://www.mpi-forum.org/ 
8. https://www.olcf.ornl.gov/summit/ 
9. https://www.hlrs.de/solutions/systems/ 
hpe-apollo-hawk 
10. https://github.com/hpc/xpmem 
11. https://mvapich.cse.ohio-state.edu/ 
benchmarks/ 
12. https://github.com/open-mpi/ompi/pull/ 
11418 
13. https://software.intel.com/en-us/ 
imb-user-guide 
14. https://github.com/LLNL/mpiBench 
15. https://www.nersc.gov/systems/perlmutter/ 
16. https://github.com/open-mpi/ompi 
17. https://spack.io/ 
References 
Alexandrov A, Ionescu MF, Schauser KE and Scheiman C 
(1995) LogGP: Incorporating long messages into the LogP 
model—one step closer towards a realistic model for parallel 
computation. In: Proceedings of the Seventh Annual ACM 
Symposium on Parallel Algorithms and Architectures, SPAA 
’95. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing 
Machinery. ISBN 0897917170, p. 95–105. DOI:10.1145/ 
215399.215427. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
215399.215427. 
Ali MM, Strazdins PE, Harding B and Hegland M (2016) 
Complex scientific applications made fault-tolerant with 
the sparse grid combination technique. International 
Journal of High Performance Computing Applications 
30(3): 335 – 359. DOI:10.1177/1094342015628056. URL 
https://www.scopus.com/inward/record. 
uri?eid=2-s2.0-84983389919&doi=10.1177% 
2f1094342015628056&partnerID=40&md5= 
622643bc6c1ce95328e7a6c84e7328c8. Cited 
by: 15. 
Bernholdt DE, Boehm S, Bosilca G, Gorentla Venkata M, Grant RE, 
Naughton T, Pritchard HP, Schulz M and Vallee GR (2020) A 
survey of MPI usage in the U.S. Exascale Computing Program. 
Concurrency and Computing: Practice and Experience 32: 
e4851, 16pp. DOI:10.1002/cpe.4851. 
Bland W, Bouteiller A, Herault T, Bosilca G and Dongarra J ´ 
(2013) Post-failure recovery of MPI communication capability: 
Design and rationale. IJHPCA 27(3): 244–254. 
Bouteiller A and Bosilca G (2022) Implicit actions and non 
blocking failure recovery with MPI. In: 12th IEEE/ACM Work 
shop on Fault Tolerance for HPC at eXtreme Scale, FTXS@SC 
2022, Dallas, TX, USA, November 13-18, 2022. IEEE, pp. 36– 
46. DOI:10.1109/FTXS56515.2022.00009. URL https: 
//doi.org/10.1109/FTXS56515.2022.00009. 
Bouteiller A, Herault T, Bosilca G, Du P and Dongarra J 
(2015) Algorithm-based fault tolerance for dense matrix 
factorizations, multiple failures and accuracy. ACM Trans. 
Parallel Comput. 1(2): 10:1–10:28. DOI:10.1145/2686892. 
URL http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2686892. 
Castain RH, Hursey J, Bouteiller A and Solt D (2018) Pmix: 
Process management for exascale environments. Parallel 
Computing 79: 9–29. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parco. 
2018.08.002. URL https://www.sciencedirect. 
com/science/article/pii/S0167819118302424. 
Chakraborty S, Laguna I, Emani M, Mohror K, Panda DK, 
Schulz M and Subramoni H (2018) EReinit: Scalable 
and efficient fault-tolerance for bulk-synchronous MPI 
applications. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and 
Experience : e4863. 
Culler D, Karp R, Patterson D, Sahay A, Schauser KE, 
Santos E, Subramonian R and von Eicken T (1993) LogP: 
Towards a Realistic Model of Parallel Computation. In: 
Proceedings of the Fourth ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on 
Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming, PPOPP 
’93. ACM. ISBN 978-0-89791-589-2, pp. 1–12. DOI:10. 
1145/155332.155333. URL http://doi.acm.org/10. 
1145/155332.155333. 
Dosanjh MG, Worley A, Schafer D, Soundararajan P, Ghafoor 
S, Skjellum A, Bangalore PV and Grant RE (2021) 
Implementation and evaluation of MPI 4.0 partitioned 
communication libraries. Parallel Computing 108: 102827. 
Evans N, Ciesko J, Olivier SL, Pritchard H, Iwasaki S, Raffenetti 
K and Balaji P (2020) Implementing flexible threading support 
in Open MPI. In: 2020 Workshop on Exascale MPI (ExaMPI). 
pp. 21–30. DOI:10.1109/ExaMPI52011.2020.00008. 

Gamell M, Katz DS, Kolla H, Chen J, Klasky S and Parashar M (2014) Exploring Automatic, Online Failure Recovery for Scientific Applications at Extreme Scales. Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis : 895–906. Gamell M, Katz DS, Teranishi K, Heroux MA, Van der Wijngaart RF, Mattson TG and Parashar M (2016) Evaluating online global recovery with Fenix using application-aware in-memory checkpointing techniques. In: 2016 45th International Conference on Parallel Processing Workshops (ICPPW). pp. 346–355. DOI:10.1109/ICPPW.2016.56. Gamell M, Teranishi K, Mayo J, Kolla H, Heroux MA, Chen J and Parashar M (2017) Modeling and simulating multiple failure masking enabled by local recovery for stencil-based applications at extreme scales. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 28(10): 2881–2895. DOI:10.1109/ TPDS.2017.2696538. Georgakoudis G, Guo L and Laguna I (2020) Reinit: Evaluating the performance of global-restart recovery methods for MPI fault tolerance. In: International Conference on High Performance Computing. Springer, pp. 536–554. Grant RE, Dosanjh MGF, Levenhagen MJ, Brightwell R and Skjellum A (2019) Finepoints: Partitioned multithreaded MPI communication. In: Weiland M, Juckeland G, Trinitis C and Sadayappan P (eds.) High Performance Computing - 34th International Conference, ISC High Performance 2019, Frankfurt/Main, Germany, June 16-20, 2019, Proceedings, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, volume 11501. Springer, pp. 330–350. DOI:10.1007/ 978-3-030-20656-7\ 17. URL https://doi.org/10. 1007/978-3-030-20656-7_17. Hjelm N, Dosanjh MGF, Grant RE, Groves T, Bridges P and Arnold D (2018) Improving MPI multi-threaded RMA communication performance. In: Proceedings of the 47th International Conference on Parallel Processing, ICPP ’18. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450365109. DOI:10.1145/3225058.3225114. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3225058.3225114. Hjelm N, Pritchard H, Gutierrez SK, Holmes DJ, Castain R ´ and Skjellum A (2019) MPI sessions: Evaluation of an implementation in Open MPI. In: 2019 IEEE International Conference on Cluster Computing (CLUSTER). pp. 1–11. DOI: 10.1109/CLUSTER.2019.8891002. Holmes D, Mohror K, Grant RE, Skjellum A, Schulz M, Bland W and Squyres JM (2016) MPI sessions: Leveraging runtime infrastructure to increase scalability of applications at exascale. In: Proceedings of the 23rd European MPI Users’ Group Meeting, EuroMPI ’16. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450342346, p. 121–129. DOI:10.1145/2966884.2966915. URL https: //doi.org/10.1145/2966884.2966915. Hursey J, Mallove E, Squyres JM and Lumsdaine A (2007) An extensible framework for distributed testing of MPI implementations. In: Cappello F, Herault T and Dongarra J (eds.) Recent Advances in Parallel Virtual Machine and Message Passing Interface. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-75416-9, pp. 64–72. URL https://github.com/open-mpi/mtt. Kaiser H, Diehl P, Lemoine AS, Lelbach BA, Amini P, Berge A, Biddiscombe J, Brandt SR, Gupta N, Heller T, Huck K,

Khatami Z, Kheirkhahan A, Reverdell A, Shirzad S, Simberg M, Wagle B, Wei W and Zhang T (2020) HPX - the C++ standard library for parallelism and concurrency. Journal of Open Source Software 5(53): 2352. DOI:10.21105/joss.02352. URL https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.02352. Katevenis G, Ploumidis M and Marazakis M (2022) A framework for hierarchical single-copy MPI collectives on multicore nodes. In: 2022 IEEE International Conference on Cluster Computing (CLUSTER). pp. 94–105. DOI:10.1109/ CLUSTER51413.2022.00024. Li J, Bosilca G, Bouteiller A and Nicolae B (2023) Elastic deep learning through resilient collective operations. In: Proceedings of the SC ’23 Workshops of The International Conference on High Performance Computing, Network, Storage, and Analysis, SC-W 2023, Denver, CO, USA, November 12-17, 2023. ACM, pp. 44–50. DOI:10.1145/ 3624062.3626080. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/ 3624062.3626080. Losada N, Gonzalez P, Mart ´ ´ın MJ, Bosilca G, Bouteiller A and Teranishi K (2020) Fault tolerance of MPI applications in exascale systems: The ULFM solution. Future Generation Computer Systems 106: 467–481. Lu H, Seo S and Balaji P (2015) MPI+ULT: Overlapping communication and computation with user-level threads. In: 2015 IEEE 17th International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications. pp. 444–454. DOI:10.1109/HPCC-CSS-ICESS.2015.82. Luo X, Wu W, Bosilca G, Pei Y, Cao Q, Patinyasakdikul T, Zhong D and Dongarra J (2020) Han: a hierarchical autotuned collective communication framework. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Cluster Computing (CLUSTER). pp. 23–34. DOI:10.1109/CLUSTER49012.2020.00013. M Squyres J and Lumsdaine A (2005) The component architecture of Open MPI: Enabling third-party collective algorithms. In: Getov V and Kielmann T (eds.) Component Models and Systems for Grid Applications. Boston, MA: Springer US, pp. 167–185. DOI:10.1007/0-387-23352-0 11. URL https: //doi.org/10.1007/0-387-23352-0_11. Marts WP, Dosanjh MG, Levy S and Schonbein W (2024) Cmb: A configurable messaging benchmark to explore fine-grained communication. In: 24th IEEE/ACM international Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Internet Computing(CCGRID). Marts WP, Dosanjh MGF, Schonbein W, Levy S and Bridges PG (2023a) Measuring thread timing to assess the feasibility of early-bird message delivery. In: Proceedings of the 52nd International Conference on Parallel Processing Workshops, ICPP Workshops ’23. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400708428, p. 119–126. DOI:10.1145/3605731.3605884. URL https://doi. org/10.1145/3605731.3605884. Marts WP, Worley A, Soundarajan P, Schafer D, Dosanjh MGF, Grant RE, Bangalore PV, Skjellum A and Ghafoor S (2023b) Design of a portable implementation of partitioned point-to point communication primitives. Concurrency and Computa tion: Practice and Experience 35(20): e7655. DOI:https://doi. org/10.1002/cpe.7655. URL https://onlinelibrary. wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1002/cpe.7655. Message Passing Interface Forum (1994) MPI: A Message-Passing Interface Standard. URL https://www.mpi-forum. org/docs/mpi-1.0/mpi-10.ps.

Message Passing Interface Forum (2015) MPI: A Message Passing Interface Standard Version 3.1. URL https://www.mpi-forum.org/docs/mpi-3.1/ mpi31-report.pdf. Message Passing Interface Forum (2021) MPI: A Message Passing Interface Standard Version 4.0. URL https://www.mpi-forum.org/docs/mpi-4.0/ mpi40-report.pdf. Parasyris K, Georgakoudis G, Bautista-Gomez L and Laguna I (2021) Co-designing multi-level checkpoint restart for MPI applications. In: 2021 IEEE/ACM 21st International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Internet Computing (CCGrid). IEEE, pp. 103–112. Pjesivac-Grbovi ˇ c J, Bosilca G, Fagg GE, Angskun T and Dongarra ´ JJ (2007) Decision trees and MPI collective algorithm selection problem. In: Kermarrec AM, Bouge L and Priol T (eds.) ´ Euro Par 2007 Parallel Processing. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. ISBN 978-3-540-74466-5, pp. 107–117. Pritchard H, Naughton T, Shehata A and Bernholdt D (2023) Open MPI for HPE Cray EX Systems. In: Proceedings of the Cray User’s Group (CUG) Annual Technical Conference. Helsinki, Finland. URL https://cug.org/ proceedings/cug2023_proceedings/includes/ files/pap140s2-file1.pdf. Schonbein W, Levy S, Dosanjh MG, Marts WP, Reid E and Grant RE (2023) Modeling and benchmarking the potential benefit of early-bird transmission in fine-grained communication. In: Proceedings of the 52nd International Conference on Parallel Processing. pp. 306–316. Schuchart J, Hunold S and Bosilca G (2023) Synchronizing MPI processes in space and time. In: Proceedings of the 30th European MPI Users’ Group Meeting, EuroMPI ’23. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9798400709135. DOI:10.1145/3615318.3615325. Seo S, Amer A, Balaji P, Bordage C, Bosilca G, Brooks A, Carns P, Castello A, Genet D, Herault T, Iwasaki S, Jindal P, Kal ´ e´ LV, Krishnamoorthy S, Lifflander J, Lu H, Meneses E, Snir M, Sun Y, Taura K and Beckman P (2018) Argobots: A lightweight low-level threading and tasking framework. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 29(3): 512–526. DOI: 10.1109/TPDS.2017.2766062. Shehata A, Naughton T, Bernholdt D and Pritchard H (2024) Bring ing HPE Slingshot 11 Support to Open MPI. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience Special Issue on Cray User Group conference (CUG2023), submitted. Wheeler KB, Murphy RC and Thain D (2008) Qthreads: An API for programming with millions of lightweight threads. In: 2008 IEEE International Symposium on Parallel and Distributed Processing Workshops. pp. 1–8. DOI:10.1109/IPDPS.2008. 4536359. Whitlock M, Morales N, Bosilca G, Bouteiller A, Nicolae B, Teranishi K, Giem E and Sarkar V (2022) Integrating process, control-flow, and data resiliency layers using a hybrid Fenix/Kokkos approach. In: IEEE International Conference on Cluster Computing, CLUSTER 2022, Heidelberg, Germany, September 5-8, 2022. IEEE, pp. 418–428. DOI:10.1109/ CLUSTER51413.2022.00052. URL https://doi.org/ 10.1109/CLUSTER51413.2022.00052. Worley A, Prema Soundararajan P, Schafer D, Bangalore P, Grant R, Dosanjh M, Skjellum A and Ghafoor S (2021) Design of a portable implementation of partitioned point-to-point communication primitives. In: 50th International Conference on Parallel Processing Workshop. pp. 1–11.

Author Biographies David E. Bernholdt is a Distinguished R&D Staff Member in the Computer Science and Mathematics Division of Oak Ridge National Laboratory. His research interests broadly relate to programming of scientific software on high-performance computers, including programming languages and models, runtime environments, and software engineering, sustainability, and trustworthiness. George Bosilca is a Research Director and Adjunct Assistant Professor at the Innovative Computing Laboratory at University of Tennessee, Knoxville. His research interests evolve around distributed algorithms, parallel programming paradigms and performance modeling and optimizations, both from a theoretical and practical perspective. Bosilca is also interest in providing scalable and portable constructs for building resilience directly into the programming models. He holds a Ph.D. in computer science from the University of Paris (XI). Aurelien Bouteiller is a Research Director at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville. His research strives to provide algorithm and design software infrastructure to sustain high-performance computing scalability: by (i) proposing fault-tolerant mechanisms, in particular extreme performance communication frameworks that can survive failures; (ii) by improving communication performance on heterogeneous, multilevel distributed memory systems; and (iii) by reconsidering the high-performance ecosystem to transition toward scalable, resilient middleware and programming paradigms. He holds a Ph.D. in computer science from the University of Paris (XI). Ron Brightwell leads the Scalable System Software department in the Center for Computing Research at Sandia National Laboratories. His research interests include high-performance, scalable communication interfaces and protocols for system area networks, and operating systems for extreme-scale parallel computing machines. He is a Senior Member of the IEEE and the IEEE Computer Society and a Senior Member of the ACM. Jan Ciesko is a Senior Member of Technical Staff at Sandia National Laboratories. He works on the Kokkos Performance Portability framework and leads several development efforts towards distributed data structures, task runtime systems and MPI interoperability. Jan holds a master’s degree in computer science from Friedrich-Alexander Universitat in Germany and a Ph.D. from ¨ Universitat Politecnica de Catalunya (BarcelonaTech) in Spain. ` Matthew G. F. Dosanjh is a Senior Member of Technical Staff at Sandia National Laboratories. His research has focused on the intersection of MPI and multi-threading. He received his Ph.D. in computer science in 2017 from the University of New Mexico. Giorgis Georgakoudis is a Computer Scientist in the Center for Advanced Scientific Computing (CASC) at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), USA. His research interests are on parallel programming models and runtime systems, compilers, fault tolerance, and performance analysis/optimization. He holds a Ph.D. in Computer Engineering from the University of Thessaly, Greece. Ignacio Laguna is a Computer Scientist and the Group Leader of the Parallel Systems Group at the Center for Applied Scientific Computing (CASC) of the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. He performs research on several areas of programing in

HPC and scientific computing, including software correctness, fault tolerance, testing, and compilers. He holds a Ph.D. in Computer Engineering from Purdue University. Scott Levy is a Principal Member of Technical Staff in the Center for Computing Research at Sandia National Laboratories. His research interests include networking for high-performance computing systems, fault-tolerant system design, and system software for massively parallel systems. Scott has a B.S. in electrical engineering from Cornell University and a Ph.D. in computer science from the University of New Mexico. Thomas Naughton is a R&D Staff Member in the Computer Science and Mathematics Division of Oak Ridge National Laboratory. His research interests include runtime environments, system software & tools for high-performance computing, and middleware for connecting distributed scientific instruments. He holds a Ph.D. in computer science from the University of Reading in England. Stephen L. Olivier is a Principal Member of Technical Staff in the Center for Computing Research at Sandia National Laboratories. His research interests include parallel programming models, runtime systems, and performance evaluation. He holds a Ph.D. in computer science from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Howard P. Pritchard is a R&D Staff Member in the HPC Division of Los Alamos National Laboratory. His research interests include runtime systems for parallel program models and workflows. He holds a Ph.D in chemistry from Caltech. Whit Schonbein is a Senior Member of Technical Staff at Sandia National Laboratories. His research interests include high performance interconnects, intelligent networks and in-network computing, and communication middleware. He holds a Ph.D. in computer science from the University of New Mexico. Joseph Schuchart received his PhD from the University of Stuttgart, Germany. He currently is a Research Assistant Professor with the Innovative Computing Laboratory at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville. His research interests include parallel programming models as well as performance analysis and optimization tools. Amir Shehata is an experienced HPC Systems Engineer at the National Center for Computational Sciences. He brings over two decades of expertise in networking technologies, Lustre file system, and open-source kernel development. Amir’s successful career highlights his commitment to delivering quality software in decentralized environments, meeting deadlines, and achieving exceptional results.

