A Survey of Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems

E. N. (MOOTAZ) ELNOZAHY

IBM Research

LORENZO ALVISI

The University of Texas at Austin

YI-MIN WANG

Microsoft Research

AND

DAVID B. JOHNSON

Rice University

This survey covers rollback-recovery techniques that do not require special language constructs. In the first part of the survey we classify rollback-recovery protocols into checkpoint-based and log-based. Checkpoint-based protocols rely solely on checkpointing for system state restoration. Checkpointing can be coordinated, uncoordinated, or communication-induced. Log-based protocols combine checkpointing with logging of nondeterministic events, encoded in tuples called determinants. Depending on how determinants are logged, log-based protocols can be pessimistic, optimistic, or causal. Throughout the survey, we highlight the research issues that are at the core of rollback-recovery and present the solutions that currently address them. We also compare the performance of different rollback-recovery protocols with respect to a series of desirable properties and discuss the issues that arise in the practical implementations of these protocols. Categories and Subject Descriptors: D.4.5 [Operating Systems]: Reliability— Checkpoint/restart; fault-tolerance; D.4.7 [Operating Systems]: Organization and Design—Distributed systems; D.2.8 [Software]: Metrics—Performance measures; General Terms: Design, Reliability, Performance Additional Key Words and Phrases: message logging, rollback-recovery

Mootaz Elnozahy started this work while at Carnegie Mellon University, where he was supported in part by 
the National Science Foundation through a Research Initiation Award under contract CCR 9410116 and a 
CAREER Award under contract CCR 9502933. Lorenzo Alvisi was supported in part by an NSF CAREER 
award (CCR-9734185), an Alfred P. Sloan Fellowship, an IBM Faculty Partnership award, DARPA/SPAWAR 
grant N66001-98-8911, and a grant of the Texas Advanced Research Program. 
Authors’ addresses: E. N. (Mootaz) Elnozahy, IBM Austin Research Lab., M/S 904-6C-020, 11501 Burnet Rd., 
Austin, TX 78578; email: mootaz@us.ibm.com; Lorenzo Alvisi, Department of Computer Sciences, Taylor Hall 
2.124 The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712-1188; email: lorenzo@cs.utexas.edu; Yi-Min Wang, 
Microsoft Corporation, One Microsoft Way, Redmond, WA 98052; email: ymwang@microsoft.com; David B. 
Johnson, Rice University, Department of Computer Science, 6100 Main St., MS 132, Houston, TX 77005- 
1892; email: dbj@cs.rice.edu. 
Permission to make digital/hard copy of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that the copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage, the 
copyright notice, the title of the publication, and its date appear, and notice is given that copying is by 
permission of the ACM, Inc. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
° c 2002 ACM 0360-0300/02/0900-0375 $5.00 

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 34, No. 3, September 2002, pp. 375–408.

376 Elnozahy et al. 1. INTRODUCTION Distributed systems today are ubiqui tous and enable many applications, in cluding client-server systems, transaction processing, World Wide Web, and scien tific computing, among many others. The vast computing potential of these systems is often hampered by their susceptibility to failures. Therefore, many techniques have been developed to add reliability and high availability to distributed sys tems. These techniques include transac tions, group communication, and rollback recovery, and have different tradeoffs and focuses. For example, transactions focus on data-oriented applications, while group communication offers an abstraction of an ideal communication system that sim plifies the development of reliable appli cations. This survey covers transparent rollback-recovery, which focuses on long running applications such as scientific computing and telecommunication appli cations [Huang and Kintala 1993; Plank 1993]. Rollback-recovery treats a distributed system as a collection of application pro cesses that communicate through a net work. The processes have access to a stable storage device that survives all tolerated failures. Processes achieve fault tolerance by using this device to save recovery in formation periodically during failure-free execution. Upon a failure, a failed pro cess uses the saved information to restart the computation from an intermediate state, thereby reducing the amount of lost computation. The recovery informa tion includes, at a minimum, the states of the participating processes, called checkpoints. Other recovery protocols may require additional information, such as logs of the interactions with input and out put devices, events that occur to each pro cess, and messages exchanged among the processes. Rollback-recovery has many flavors. For example, a system may rely on the ap plication to decide when and what to save on stable storage. Or, it may provide the application programmer with linguis tic constructs to structure the application

[Randell 1975]. We focus in this survey on transparent techniques, which do not re quire any intervention on the part of the application or the programmer. The sys tem automatically takes checkpoints ac cording to some specified policy, and re covers automatically from failures if they occur. This approach has the advantages of relieving the application programmers from the complex and error-prone chores of implementing fault tolerance and of of fering fault tolerance to existing applica tions written without consideration to re liability concerns. Rollback-recovery has been studied in various forms and in connection with many fields of research. Thus, it is per haps impossible to provide an extensive coverage of all the issues related to rollback-recovery within the scope of one article. This survey concentrates on the definitions, fundamental con cepts, and implementation issues of rollback-recovery protocols in distributed systems. The coverage excludes the use of rollback-recovery in many related fields such as hardware-level instruction retry, distributed shared memory [Morin and Puaut 1997], real-time systems, and de bugging [Mellor-Crummey and LeBlanc 1989]. The coverage also excludes the issues of using rollback-recovery when failures could include Byzantine modes or are not restricted to the fail-stop model [Schlichting and Schneider 1983]. Also excluded are rollback-recovery techniques that rely on special language constructs such as recovery blocks [Randell 1975] and transactions. Finally, the section on imple mentation exposes many relevant issues related to implementing checkpointing on uniprocessors, although the coverage is by no means an exhaustive one because of the large number of issues involved. Message-passing systems complicate rollback-recovery because messages in duce inter-process dependencies during failure-free operation. Upon a failure of one or more processes in a system, these dependencies may force some of the processes that did not fail to roll back, creating what is commonly called rollback propagation. To see why rollback

Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems 377 propagation occurs, consider the situation where a sender of a message m rolls back to a state that precedes the sending of m. The receiver of m must also roll back to a state that precedes m’s receipt; otherwise, the states of the two processes would be inconsistent because they would show that message m was received without being sent, which is impossible in any correct failure-free execution. Under some scenarios, rollback propagation may extend back to the initial state of the com putation, losing all the work performed before a failure. This situation is known as the domino effect [Randell 1975]. The domino effect may occur if each process takes its checkpoints independently—an approach known as independent or uncoordinated checkpoint ing. It is obviously desirable to avoid the domino effect and therefore several techniques have been developed to pre vent it. One such technique is to perform coordinated checkpointing in which pro cesses coordinate their checkpoints in order to save a system-wide consistent state [Chandy and Lamport 1985]. This consistent set of checkpoints can then be used to bound rollback propagation. Alter natively, communication-induced check pointing forces each process to take checkpoints based on information pig gybacked on the application messages received from other processes [Russell 1980]. Checkpoints are taken such that a system-wide consistent state always exists on stable storage, thereby avoiding the domino effect. The approaches discussed so far imple ment checkpoint-based rollback-recovery, which relies only on checkpoints to achieve fault-tolerance. In contrast, log based rollback-recovery combines check pointing with logging of nondeterministic events. 1 Log-based rollback-recovery re lies on the piecewise deterministic (PWD)

1 Earlier papers in this area have assumed a model in which the occurrence of a nondeterministic event is modeled as a message receipt. In this model, non deterministic event logging reduces to message log ging. In this paper, we use the terms event logging and message logging interchangeably.

assumption [Strom and Yemini 1985], which postulates that all nondeterminis tic events that a process executes can be identified and that the information neces sary to replay each event during recovery can be logged in the event’s determinant [Alvisi 1996; Alvisi and Marzullo 1998]. By logging and replaying the nondeterminis tic events in their exact original order, a process can deterministically recreate its pre-failure state even if this state has not been checkpointed. Log-based rollback recovery in general enables a system to recover beyond the most recent set of con sistent checkpoints. It is therefore partic ularly attractive for applications that fre quently interact with the outside world, which consists of all input and output devices that cannot roll back. Log-based rollback-recovery has three flavors, de pending on how the determinants are logged to stable storage. In pessimistic log ging, the application has to block waiting for the determinant of each nondetermin istic event to be stored on stable storage before the effects of that event can be seen by other processes or the outside world. Pessimistic logging simplifies re covery but hurts failure-free performance. In optimistic logging, the application does not block, and determinants are spooled to stable storage asynchronously. Optimistic logging reduces the failure-free over head, but complicates recovery. Finally, in causal logging, low failure-free overhead and simpler recovery are combined by striking a balance between optimistic and pessimistic logging. The three flavors also differ in their requirements for garbage collection and their interactions with the outside world, as will be explained later. The outline of the rest of the survey is as follows:

r Section 2: System model, terminology and generic issues in rollback-recovery.

r Section 3: Checkpoint-based rollback recovery protocols.

r Section 4: Log-based rollback-recovery protocols. 
r Section 5: Implementation issues. 
r Section 6: Conclusions. 

378 Elnozahy et al.

Fig. 1. An example of a message-passing system with three processes.

2. BACKGROUND AND DEFINITIONS 2.1. System Model A message-passing system consists of a fixed number of processes that communi cate only through messages. Throughout this survey, we use N to denote the to tal number of processes in a system. Pro cesses cooperate to execute a distributed application program and interact with the outside world by receiving and sending input and output messages, respectively. Figure 1 shows a sample system consist ing of three processes, where horizontal lines extending toward the right-hand side represent the execution of each process, and arrows between processes represent messages. Rollback-recovery protocols generally assume that the communication network is immune to partitioning but differ in the assumptions they make about net work reliability. Some protocols assume that the communication subsystem de livers messages reliably, in first-in-first out (FIFO) order [Chandy and Lamport 1985], while other protocols assume that the communication subsystem can lose, duplicate, or reorder messages [Johnson 1989]. The choice between these two as sumptions usually affects the complexity of recovery and its implementation in dif ferent ways. Generally, assuming a reli able network simplifies the design of the recovery protocol but introduces imple mentation complexities that will be de scribed in Sections 2.3, 2.4 and 5.4.2. A process execution is a sequence of state intervals, each started by a nonde terministic event. Execution during each state interval is deterministic, such that if a process starts from the same state and is subjected to the same nondeterministic events at the same locations within the ex ecution, it will always yield the same out put. A concept related to the state interval is the piecewise deterministic assumption (PWD). This assumption states that the system can detect and capture sufficient information about the nondeterministic events that initiate the state intervals. A process may fail, in which case it loses its volatile state and stops execution ac cording to the fail-stop model [Schlichting and Schneider 1983]. Processes have ac cess to a stable storage device that sur vives failures, such that state information saved on this device during failure-free ex ecution can be used for recovery. The num ber of tolerated process failures may vary from 1 to N, and the recovery protocol needs to be designed accordingly. Further more, some protocols may not tolerate fail ures that occur during recovery. A generic correctness condition for rollback-recovery can be defined as fol lows: “A system recovers correctly if its internal state is consistent with the observable behavior of the system before the failure” [Strom and Yemini 1985]. Rollback-recovery protocols therefore must maintain information about the in ternal interactions among processes and also the external interactions with the out side world. A description of the notion of consistency and the interactions with the outside world follows.

2.2. Consistent System States A global state of a message-passing system is a collection of the individual states of all participating processes and of the states of the communication channels. Intuitively, a consistent global state is one that may occur during a failure-free, correct execu tion of a distributed computation. More precisely, a consistent system state is one in which, if the state of a process reflects a message receipt, then the state of the corresponding sender reflects sending that message [Chandy and Lamport 1985]. For example, Figure 2 shows two examples of global states—a consistent state in Figure 2(a), and an inconsistent

Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems 379

Fig. 2. An example of a consistent and inconsistent state.

state in Figure 2(b). Note that the consis tent state in Figure 2(a) shows message m1 to have been sent but not yet received. This state is consistent, because it repre sents a situation in which the message has left the sender and is still traveling across the network. On the other hand, the state in Figure 2(b) is inconsistent because process P2 is shown to have received m2 but the state of process P1 does not reflect sending it. Such a state is impossible in any failure-free, correct computation. In consistent states occur because of failures. For example, the situation shown in part (b) of Figure 2 may occur if process P1 fails after sending message m2 to P2 and then restarts at the state shown in the figure. A fundamental goal of any rollback recovery protocol is to bring the system into a consistent state when inconsisten cies occur because of a failure. The recon structed consistent state is not necessarily one that has occurred before the failure. It is sufficient that the reconstructed state be one that could have occurred before the failure in a failure-free, correct execution, provided that it be consistent with the in teractions that the system had with the outside world. We describe these interac tions next. 2.3. Interactions with the Outside World A message-passing system often interacts with the outside world to receive input data or show the outcome of a computa tion. If a failure occurs, the outside world cannot be relied on to roll back [Pausch 1988]. For example, a printer cannot roll back the effects of printing a character, and an automatic teller machine cannot recover the money that it dispensed to a customer. To simplify the presentation of how rollback-recovery protocols interact with the outside world, we model the latter as a special process that interacts with the rest of the system through message pass ing. This special process cannot fail, and it cannot maintain state or participate in the recovery protocol. Furthermore, since this special process models irreversible effects in the outside world, it cannot roll back. We call this special process the “outside world process” (OWP). It is necessary that the outside world perceive a consistent behavior of the sys tem despite failures. Thus, before send ing a message (output) to OWP, the sys tem must ensure that the state from which the message is sent will be recovered de spite any future failure. This is commonly called the output commit problem [Strom and Yemini 1985]. Similarly, input mes sages that a system receives from the out side world may not be reproducible during recovery, because it may not be possible for OWP to regenerate them. Thus, recov ery protocols must arrange to save these input messages so that they can be re trieved when needed for execution replay after a failure. A common approach is to save each input message on stable storage before allowing the application program to process it. Rollback-recovery protocols, therefore, must provide special treatment for inter actions with the outside world. There are two metrics that express the impact of this special treatment, namely the latency of input/output and the resulting slowdown of system’s execution during input/output. The first metric represents the time it takes for an output message to be released to OWP after it has been issued by the sys tem, or the time it takes a process to con sume an input message after it has been sent from OWP. The second metric repre sents the overhead that the system incurs to ensure that its state will remain con sistent with the messages exchanged with the OWP despite future failures.

2.4. In-Transit Messages In Figure 2(a), the global state shows that message m1 has been sent but not

380 Elnozahy et al.

Fig. 3. Implementation of rollback-recovery (a) on top of a reliable communication protocol; (b) directly on top of unreliable communication channels.

yet received. We call such a message an in-transit message. When in-transit mes sages are part of a global system state, they do not cause any inconsistency. How ever, depending on whether the system model assumes reliable communication channels, rollback-recovery protocols may have to guarantee the delivery of in transit messages when failures occur. For example, the rollback-recovery protocol in Figure 3(a) assumes reliable communi cations, and therefore it must be imple mented on top of a reliable communication protocol layer. In contrast, the rollback recovery protocol in Figure 3(b) does not assume reliable communications. Reliable communication protocols en sure the reliability of message delivery during failure-free executions. They cannot, however, ensure by themselves, the reliability of message delivery in the presence of process failures. For instance, if an in-transit message is lost because the intended receiver has failed, conventional communication protocols will generate a timeout and inform the sender that the message cannot be delivered. In a rollback-recovery system, however, the re ceiver will eventually recover. Therefore, the system must mask the timeout from the application program at the sender pro cess and must make in-transit messages available to the intended receiver process after it recovers, in order to ensure a consistent view of the reliable system. On the other hand, if a system model assumes unreliable communication channels, as in Figure 3(b), then the recovery protocol need not handle in-transit messages in any special way. Indeed, in-transit messages lost because of process failures cannot be distinguished from those lost be cause of communication failures in an un reliable communication channel. There fore, the loss of in-transit messages due to either communication or process failure is an event that can occur in any failure-free, correct execution of the system.

2.5. Logging Protocols Log-based rollback-recovery uses check pointing and logging to enable processes to replay their execution after a failure be yond the most recent checkpoint. This is useful when interactions with the outside world are frequent, since it enables a pro cess to repeat its execution and be consis tent with messages sent to OWP without having to take expensive checkpoints be fore sending such messages. Additionally, log-based recovery generally is not suscep tible to the domino effect, thereby allow ing processes to use uncoordinated check pointing if desired. Log-based recovery relies on the piece wise deterministic (PWD) assumption [Strom and Yemini 1985]. Under this assumption, the rollback-recovery proto col can identify all the nondeterminis tic events executed by each process, and for each such event, logs a determinant that contains all information necessary to replay the event should it be necessary during recovery. If the PWD assumption holds, log-based rollback-recovery proto cols can recover a failed process and re play its execution as it occurred before the failure. Examples of nondeterministic events in clude receiving messages, receiving in put from the outside world, or undergoing an internal state transfer within a pro cess based on some nondeterministic ac tion such as the receipt of an interrupt. Rollback-recovery implementations differ in the range of actual nondeterministic events that are covered under this model. For instance, a particular implementa tion may only cover message receipts from other processes under the PWD assump tion. Such an implementation cannot

Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems 381

Fig. 4. Message logging for deterministic replay.

replay an execution that is subjected to other forms of nondeterministic events such as asynchronous interrupts. The range of events covered under the PWD as sumption is an implementation issue and is covered in Section 5.7. A state interval is recoverable if there is sufficient information to replay the ex ecution up to that state interval despite any future failures in the system. Also, a state interval is stable if the determinant of the nondeterministic event that started it is logged on stable storage [Johnson and Zwaenepoel 1990]. A recoverable state in terval is always stable, but the opposite is not always true [Johnson 1989]. Figure 4 shows an execution in which the only nondeterministic events are mes sage deliveries. Suppose that processes P1 and P2 fail before logging the determi nants corresponding to the deliveries of m6 and m5, respectively, while all other determinants survive the failure. Message m7 becomes an orphan message because process P2 cannot guarantee the regen eration of the same m6 during recovery, and P1 cannot guarantee the regeneration of the same m7 without the original m6. As a result, the surviving process P0 be comes an orphan process and is forced to roll back as well. States X , Y and Z form the maximum recoverable state [Johnson 1989], that is, the most recent recover able consistent system state. Processes P0 and P2 roll back to checkpoints A and C, respectively, and replay the deliveries of messages m4 and m2, respectively, to reach states X and Z. Process P1 rolls back to checkpoint B and replays the deliveries of m1 and m3 in their original order to reach state Y.

During recovery, log-based rollback recovery protocols force the execution of the system to be identical to the one that occurred before the failure, up to the maxi mum recoverable state. Therefore, the sys tem always recovers to a state that is consistent with the input and output inter actions that occurred up to the maximum recoverable state.

2.6. Stable Storage Rollback-recovery uses stable storage to save checkpoints, event logs, and other recovery-related information. Stable stor age in rollback-recovery is only an abstrac tion, although it is often confused with the disk storage used to implement it. Sta ble storage must ensure that the recovery data persist through the tolerated failures and their corresponding recoveries. This requirement can lead to different imple mentation styles of stable storage:

r In a system that tolerates only a single failure, stable storage may consist of the volatile memory of another process [Borg et al. 1989; Johnson and Zwaenepoel 1987].

r In a system that wishes to tolerate an ar bitrary number of transient failures, sta ble storage may consist of a local disk in each host.

r In a system that tolerates non-transient failures, stable storage must consist of a persistent medium outside the host on which a process is running. A replicated file system is a possible implementation in such systems [Lampson and Sturgis 1979].

2.7. Garbage Collection Checkpoints and event logs consume stor age resources. As the application pro gresses and more recovery information is collected, a subset of the stored in formation may become useless for recov ery. Garbage collection is the deletion of such useless recovery information. A com mon approach to garbage collection is to identify the most recent consistent set of checkpoints, which is called the recovery

382 Elnozahy et al. line [Randell 1975], and discard all infor mation relating to events that occurred before that line. For example, processes that coordinate their checkpoints to form consistent states will always restart from the most recent checkpoint of each pro cess, and so all previous checkpoints can be discarded. While it has received lit tle attention in the literature, garbage collection is an important pragmatic is sue in rollback-recovery protocols, because running a special algorithm to discard useless information incurs overhead. Fur thermore, recovery-protocols differ in the amount and nature of the recovery infor mation they need to store on stable stor age, and therefore differ in the complexity and invocation frequency of their garbage collection algorithms. 3. CHECKPOINT-BASED ROLLBACK RECOVERY Upon a failure, checkpoint-based rollback recovery restores the system state to the most recent consistent set of checkpoints, that is the recovery line [Randell 1975]. It does not rely on the PWD assump tion, and so does not need to detect, log, or replay nondeterministic events. Checkpoint-based protocols are therefore less restrictive and simpler to imple ment than log-based rollback-recovery. But checkpoint-based rollback-recovery does not guarantee that pre-failure execu tion can be deterministically regenerated after a rollback. Therefore, checkpoint based rollback-recovery is ill suited for ap plications that require frequent interac tions with the outside world, since such interactions require that the observable behavior of the system through failures and recoveries be the same as during a failure-free execution. Checkpoint-based rollback-recovery techniques can be clas sified into three categories: uncoordinated checkpointing, coordinated checkpointing, and communication-induced checkpoint ing. We examine each category in detail. 3.1. Uncoordinated Checkpointing 3.1.1. Overview. Uncoordinated check pointing allows each process the maxi

Fig. 5. Checkpoint index and checkpoint interval.

mum autonomy in deciding when to take checkpoints. The main advantage of this autonomy is that each process may take a checkpoint when it is most convenient. For example, a process may reduce the overhead by taking checkpoints when the amount of state information to be saved is small [Wang 1993]. But there are several disadvantages. First, there is the possibil ity of the domino effect, which may cause the loss of a large amount of useful work, possibly all the way back to the beginning of the computation. Second, a process may take a useless checkpoint that will never be part of a global consistent state. Use less checkpoints are undesirable because they incur overhead and do not contribute to advancing the recovery line. Third, un coordinated checkpointing forces each pro cess to maintain multiple checkpoints, and to periodically invoke a garbage collection algorithm to reclaim the checkpoints that are no longer useful. Fourth, it is not suit able for applications with frequent out put commits because these require global coordination to compute the recovery line, negating much of the advantage of autonomy. In order to determine a consistent global checkpoint during recovery, the pro cesses record the dependencies among their checkpoints during failure-free op eration using the following technique [Bhargava and Lian 1988]. Let ci,xbe the x the checkpoint of process Pi. We call x the checkpoint index. Let Ii,xdenote the check point interval or simply interval between checkpoints ci,x− 1 and ci,x . As illustrated in Figure 5, if process Pi at interval Ii,x sends a message m to Pj , it will piggyback the pair (i, x) on m. When Pj receives m dur ing interval I j, y , it records the dependency from Ii,x to I j, y , which is later saved onto

Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems 383

Fig. 6. (a) Example execution; (b) rollback-dependency graph; (c) check point graph.

stable storage when Pj takes checkpoint c j, y . If a failure occurs, the recovering pro cess initiates rollback by broadcasting a dependency request message to collect all the dependency information maintained by each process. When a process receives this message, it stops its execution and replies with the dependency information saved on stable storage as well as with the dependency information, if any, that is as sociated with its current state. The initia tor then calculates the recovery line based on the global dependency information and broadcasts a rollback request message con taining the recovery line. Upon receiv ing this message, a process whose current state belongs to the recovery line simply resumes execution; otherwise it rolls back to an earlier checkpoint as indicated by the recovery line.

3.1.2. Dependency Graphs and Recovery Line Calculation. There are two approaches proposed in the literature to determine the recovery line in checkpoint-based re covery. The first approach is based on a rollback-dependency graph [Bhargava and Lian 1988] in which each node represents a checkpoint and a directed edge is drawn from ci,x to c j, y if either:

(1) i 6= j, and a message m is sent from Ii,x and received in I j, y , or (2) i = j and y = x + 1. The name “rollback-dependency graph” comes from the observation that if there is an edge from ci,x to c j, y and a failure forces Ii,x to be rolled back, then I j, y must also be rolled back. Figure 6(b) shows the rollback de pendency graph for the execution in Figure 6(a). The algorithm used to com pute the recovery line first marks the graph nodes corresponding to the states of processes P0 and P1 at the failure point (shown in figure in dark ellipses). It then uses reachability analysis [Bhargava and Lian 1988] to mark all reachable nodes from any of the initially marked nodes. The union of the last unmarked nodes over the entire system forms the recovery line, as shown in Figure 6(b). The second approach is based on the checkpoint graph [Wang 1993]. Check point graphs are similar to rollback dependency graphs except that, when a message is sent from Ii,xand received in I j, y , a directed edge is drawn from ci,x− 1 to c j, y (instead of ci,x to c j, y ), as shown in Figure 6(c). The recovery line can be cal culated by first removing both the nodes

384 Elnozahy et al.

Fig. 7. Rollback propagation, recovery line and the domino effect.

corresponding to the states of the failed processes at the point of failures and the edges incident on them, and then applying the rollback propagation algorithm [Wang 1993] on the checkpoint graph. Both the rollback-dependency graph and the check point graph approaches are equivalent, in that they always produce the same recov ery line (as indeed they do in the exam ple). These methods form the basis for per forming garbage collection in independent checkpointing, by determining the most advanced recovery line and removing the checkpoints that precede it [Wang 1993]. Additionally, some checkpoints taken in dependently by a process may never be part of a consistent state and therefore will be useless for recovery purposes. These checkpoints also can be removed using the algorithm described by Wang [1993]. Fi nally, it can be shown under independent checkpointing that the maximum number of useful checkpoints that must be kept on stable storage cannot exceed (N (N+ 1)/2) [Wang et al. 1995a].

3.1.3. The Domino Effect. While sim ple to implement, uncoordinated check pointing can lead to the domino effect [Randell 1975]. For example, Figure 7 shows an execution in which processes take their checkpoints—represented by black bars—without coordinating with each other. Each process starts its execu tion with an initial checkpoint. Suppose process P2 fails and rolls back to check point C. The rollback “invalidates” the sending of message m6, and so P1 must roll back to checkpoint B to “invalidate” the receipt of that message. Thus, the invali dation of message m6 propagates the roll back of process P2 to process P1, which in turn “invalidates” message m7 and forces P0 to roll back as well. This cascaded rollback may continue and eventually may lead to the domino ef fect, which causes the system to roll back to the beginning of the computation, in spite of all the saved checkpoints. In the example shown in Figure 7, cascading roll backs due to the single failure of process P2 forces the system to restart from the initial set of checkpoints, effectively caus ing the loss of all the work done by all processes.

3.2. Coordinated Checkpointing 3.2.1. Overview. Coordinated check pointing requires processes to orchestrate their checkpoints in order to form a consistent global state. Coordinated checkpointing simplifies recovery and is not susceptible to the domino effect, since every process always restarts from its most recent checkpoint. Also, coordinated checkpointing requires each process to maintain only one permanent check point on stable storage, reducing storage overhead and eliminating the need for garbage collection. Its main disadvantage, however, is the large latency involved in committing output, since a global checkpoint is needed before messages can be sent to OWP. A straightforward approach to coordi nated checkpointing is to block communi cations while the checkpointing protocol executes [Tamir and Sequin 1984]. A coor dinator takes a checkpoint and broadcasts a request message to all processes, asking them to take a checkpoint. When a process receives this message, it stops its execu tion, flushes all the communication chan nels, takes a tentative checkpoint, and sends an acknowledgment message back to the coordinator. After the coordinator receives acknowledgments from all pro cesses, it broadcasts a commit message that completes the two-phase checkpoint ing protocol. After receiving the commit message, each process removes the old per manent checkpoint and atomically makes the tentative checkpoint permanent. The

Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems 385

Fig. 8. Non-blocking coordinated checkpointing: (a) checkpoint inconsis tency; (b) with FIFO channels; (c) non-FIFO channels (short dashed line rep resents piggybacked checkpoint request).

process is then free to resume execu tion and exchange messages with other processes. This straightforward approach, however, can result in large overhead, and therefore non-blocking checkpointing schemes are preferable [Elnozahy et al. 1992].

3.2.2. Non-blocking Checkpoint Coordination. A fundamental problem in coordinated checkpointing is to prevent a process from receiving application messages that could make the checkpoint inconsistent. Con sider the example in Figure 8(a), in which message m is sent by P0 after receiv ing a checkpoint request from the check point coordinator. Now, assume that m reaches P1 before the checkpoint request. This situation results in an inconsistent checkpoint since checkpoint c1,x shows the receipt of message m from P0, while check point c0,x does not show it being sent from P0. If channels are FIFO, this problem can be avoided by preceding the first post checkpoint message on each channel by a checkpoint request, and forcing each process to take a checkpoint upon receiv ing the first checkpoint-request message, as illustrated in Figure 8(b). An exam ple of a non-blocking checkpoint coordi nation protocol using this idea is the dis tributed snapshot [Chandy and Lamport 1985], in which markers play the role of the checkpoint-request messages. In this protocol, the initiator takes a checkpoint and broadcasts a marker (a checkpoint request) to all processes. Each process takes a checkpoint upon receiving the first marker and rebroadcasts the marker to all processes before sending any application message. The protocol works assuming the channels are reliable and FIFO. If the channels are non-FIFO, the marker can be piggybacked on every post-checkpoint message as in Figure 8(c) [Lai and Yang 1987]. Alternatively, checkpoint indices can serve the same role as markers, where a checkpoint is triggered when the re ceiver’s local checkpoint index is lower than the piggybacked checkpoint index [Elnozahy, et al. 1992; Silva 1997].

3.2.3. Checkpointing with Synchronized Clocks. Loosely synchronized clocks can facilitate checkpoint coordination [Cristian and Jahanian 1991; Tong et al. 1992]. More specifically, loosely syn chronized clocks can trigger the local checkpointing actions of all participating processes at approximately the same time without a checkpoint initiator [Cristian and Jahanian 1991]. A process takes a checkpoint and waits for a period that equals the sum of the maximum deviation between clocks and the maximum time to detect a failure in another process in the system. The process can be assured that all checkpoints belonging to the same coordination session have been taken without the need of exchanging any messages. If a failure occurs, it is detected within the specified time and the protocol is aborted.

3.2.4. Checkpointing and Communication Reliability. Depending on the assumption of reliability of the communication chan nel (Section 2.4), the protocol may require

386 Elnozahy et al. some messages to be saved as part of the checkpoint. Consider the case where reliable channels are assumed. Suppose process p sends a message m before taking a checkpoint, and that message m arrives at the intended destination at process q after q has taken its checkpoint. In this case, the recorded state of p would show message m to have been sent, while q0s state would show that the message has not been received. If a failure were to force p and q to roll back to these checkpoints, it would be impossible to guarantee the reliable delivery of m after recovery. To avoid this problem, the pro tocol requires that all in-transit messages be saved by their intended destinations as part of their recorded state. However, if reliable channels are not assumed, then in-transit messages need not be saved, as the recorded state in this case would still be consistent with the assumption of the communication channels (in this case, the loss of message m if the system fails and restarts would be equivalent to its loss due to a communication failure in a legal execution).

3.2.5. Minimal Checkpoint Coordination. Coordinated checkpointing requires all processes to participate in every checkpoint. This requirement generates valid concerns about its scalability. It is desirable to reduce the number of processes involved in a coordinated checkpointing session. This can be done since the processes that need to take new checkpoints are only those that have communicated with the checkpoint initiator either directly or indirectly since the last checkpoint [Koo and Toueg 1987]. The following two-phase protocol achieves minimal checkpoint coordi nation [Koo and Toueg 1987]. During the first phase, the checkpoint initiator identifies all processes with which it has communicated since the last checkpoint and sends them a request. Upon receiving the request, each process in turn iden tifies all processes it has communicated with since the last checkpoints and sends them a request, and so on, until no more

Fig. 9. Z-paths Z cycles.

processes can be identified. During the second phase, all processes identified in the first phase take a checkpoint. The result is a consistent checkpoint that involves only the participating processes. In this protocol, after a process takes a checkpoint, it cannot send any message until the second phase terminates suc cessfully, although receiving a message after the checkpoint has been taken is allowed.

3.3. Communication-induced Checkpointing 3.3.1. Overview. Communication induced checkpointing (CIC) protocols avoid the domino effect without requiring all checkpoints to be coordinated. In these protocols, processes take two kinds of checkpoints, local and forced. Local checkpoints can be taken independently, while forced checkpoint must be taken to guarantee the eventual progress of the recovery line. In particular, CIC protocols take forced checkpoints to prevent the creation of useless checkpoints, that is checkpoints (such as c2,2 in Figure 9) that will never be part of a consistent global state. Useless checkpoints are not desir able because they do not contribute to the recovery of the system from failures, but they consume resources and cause performance overhead. As opposed to coordinated checkpoint ing, CIC protocols do not exchange any special coordination messages to deter mine when forced checkpoints should be taken: instead, they piggyback protocol specific information on each application message; the receiver then uses this in formation to decide if it should take a forced checkpoint. Informally, this deci sion is based on the receiver determin ing if past communication and checkpoint

Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems 387 patterns can lead to the creation of useless checkpoints: a forced checkpoint is then taken to break these patterns. This intu ition has been formalized in an elegant theory based on the notions of Z-path and Z-cycle. A Z-path (zigzag path) is a special se quence of messages that connects two checkpoints [Netzer and Xu 1995]. Let 7→denote Lamport’s happen-before relation [Lamport 1978]. Let ci,x denote the x th checkpoint of process Pi. Also, define the execution portion between two consecu tive checkpoints on the same process to be the checkpoint interval starting with the earlier checkpoint. Given two checkpoints ci,x and c j, y , a Z-path exists between ci,x and c j, y if and only if one of the following two conditions holds: 1. x < y and i = j; or 2. There exists a sequence of messages [m0, m1, ... , mn], nµ0, such that: r ci,x 7→ sendi(m0); r ∀ l < n, either deliverk(ml ) and sendk(ml+ 1) are in the same check point interval, or deliverk(ml ) 7→sendk(ml+ 1); and r deliver j(mn) 7→ c j, y where sendi and deliveri are communi cation events executed by process Pi. In Figure 9, [m1, m2] and [m3, m4] are exam ples of Z-paths between checkpoints c0,1 and c2,2. A Z-cycle is a Z-path that begins and ends with the same checkpoint. In Figure 9, the Z-path [m5, m3, m4] is a Z-cycle that starts and ends at checkpoint c2,2. Z-cycles are interesting in the context of CIC protocols because it can be proved that a checkpoint is useless if and only if it is part of a Z-cycle [Netzer and Xu 1995]. Hence, one way to avoid useless check points is to make sure that no Z-path ever becomes a Z-cycle. Traditionally, CIC protocols have been classified in one of two types. Model-based checkpointing protocols maintain check point and communication structures that prevent useless checkpoints or achieve some even stronger properties [Wang 1997]. Index-based coordination protocols

assign timestamps to local and forced checkpoints such that checkpoints with the same timestamp at all processes form a consistent state. Recently, it has been proved that the two types are fundamen tally equivalent [Helary et al. 1997a], ´ although in practice, there may be some evidence that index-based coordination re sults in fewer forced checkpoints [Alvisi et al. 1999].

3.3.2. Model-based Protocols. Model based checkpointing relies on preventing patterns of communications and check points that could result in Z-cycles and useless checkpoints. A model is set up to detect the possibility that such patterns could be forming within the system, ac cording to some heuristic. A checkpoint is usually forced to prevent the undesirable patterns from occurring. The decision to force a checkpoint is done locally using the information piggybacked on application messages. Therefore, under this style of checkpointing it is possible that multiple processes detect the potential for inconsis tent checkpoints and independently force local checkpoints to prevent the formation of undesirable patterns that may never actually materialize or that could be prevented by a single forced checkpoint. Thus, model-based checkpointing always errs on the conservative side by taking more forced checkpoints than is proba bly necessary, because without explicit coordination, no process has complete information about the global system state. The literature contains several domino effect-free checkpoint and communica tion models. The MRS model [Russell 1980] avoids the domino effect by ensur ing that within every checkpoint inter val all message-receiving events precede all message-sending events. This model can be maintained by taking an addi tional checkpoint before every message receiving event that is not separated from its previous message-sending event by a checkpoint [Wang 1997]. Another way to prevent the domino effect is to avoid rollback propagation completely by tak ing a checkpoint immediately before every

388 Elnozahy et al. 
message-sending event [Bartlett 1981]. 
Recent work has focused on ensuring that 
every checkpoint can belong to a consis 
tent global checkpoint and therefore is not 
useless [Baldoni et al. 1998; Helary et al. ´ 
1997a; Helary et al. 1997b; Netzer and Xu ´ 
1995]. 

3.3.3. Index-based Protocols. Index based CIC protocols guarantee, through forced checkpoints if necessary, that (1) if there are two checkpoints ci,m and c j,n such that ci,m 7→ c j,n, then ts(c j,n) ≥ts(ci,m), where ts(c) is the timestamp associated with checkpoint c; and (2) consecutive local checkpoints of a pro cess have increasing timestamps. The timestamps are piggybacked on applica tion messages to help receivers decide when they should force a checkpoint. For instance, the protocol by Briatico et al. forces a process to take a checkpoint upon receiving a message with a piggybacked index greater than the local index, and guarantees that the checkpoints having the same index at different processes, form a consistent state [Briatico et al. 1984]. Helary et al. instead rely on the ´ observation that if checkpoints’ times tamps always increase along a Z-path (as opposed to simply non-decreasing, as required by rule (1) above), then no Z cycle can ever form [Helary et al. 1997b]. ´ More sophisticated protocols piggyback more information on top of application messages to minimize the number of forced checkpoints [Helary et al. 1997b]. ´ CIC protocols can potentially have sev eral performance advantages over other styles of checkpointing. Because CIC al lows considerable autonomy in deciding when to take checkpoints, processes can take local checkpoints when their state is small and saving it incurs a small over head [Li and Fuchs 1990; Plank et al. 1995b]. CIC protocols may also, in theory, scale up well in systems with a large num ber of processes, since they do not require processes to participate in a globally coor dinated checkpoint. We discuss the degree to which these advantages materialize in practice in Section 5.

4. LOG-BASED ROLLBACK-RECOVERY As opposed to checkpoint-based rollback recovery, log-based rollback-recovery makes explicit use of the fact that a process execution can be modeled as a sequence of deterministic state inter vals, each starting with the execution of a nondeterministic event [Strom and Yemini 1985]. Such an event can be the receipt of a message from another pro cess or an event internal to the process. Sending a message, however, is not a nondeterministic event. For example, in Figure 7, the execution of process P0 is a sequence of four deterministic intervals. The first one starts with the creation of the process, while the remaining three start with the receipt of messages m0, m3, and m7, respectively. Sending message m2 is uniquely determined by the initial state of P0 and by the receipt of message m0, and is therefore not a nondeterministic event. Log-based rollback-recovery assumes that all nondeterministic events can be identified and their corresponding deter minants can be logged to stable storage. During failure-free operation, each pro cess logs the determinants of all the non deterministic events that it observes onto stable storage. Additionally, each process also takes checkpoints to reduce the ex tent of rollback during recovery. After a failure occurs, the failed processes re cover by using the checkpoints and logged determinants to replay the correspond ing nondeterministic events precisely as they occurred during the pre-failure exe cution. Because execution within each de terministic interval depends only on the sequence of nondeterministic events that preceded the interval’s beginning, the pre failure execution of a failed process can be reconstructed during recovery up to the first nondeterministic event whose deter minant is not logged. Log-based rollback-recovery protocols have been traditionally called “message logging protocols.” The association of non deterministic events with messages is rooted in the earliest systems that pro posed and implemented this style of

Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems 389 recovery [Bartlett 1981; Borg, et al. 1989; Strom and Yemini 1985]. These systems translated nondeterministic events into deterministic message-receipt events. Log-based rollback-recovery protocols guarantee that upon recovery of all failed processes, the system does not contain any orphan process, that is, a process whose state depends on a nondeterministic event that cannot be reproduced during recov ery. The way in which a specific protocol implements this condition affects the pro tocol’s failure-free performance overhead, latency of output commit, and simplicity of recovery and garbage collection, as well as its potential for rolling back correct pro cesses. There are three flavors of these protocols:

r Pessimistic log-based rollback-recovery protocols guarantee that orphans are never created due to a failure. These pro tocols simplify recovery, garbage collec tion and output commit, at the expense of higher failure-free performance over head.

r Optimistic log-based rollback-recovery protocols reduce the failure-free perfor mance overhead, but allow orphans to be created due to failures. The possibility of having orphans complicates recovery, garbage collection and output commit.

r Causal log-based rollback-recovery pro tocols attempt to combine the advan tages of low performance overhead and fast output commit, but they may re quire complex recovery and garbage collection. We present log-based rollback-recovery protocols by first specifying a property that guarantees that no orphans are cre ated during an execution, and then by dis cussing how the three major classes of log-based rollback-recovery protocols im plement this consistency condition. 4.1. The No-Orphans Consistency Condition Let e be a nondeterministic event that oc curs at process p, we define:

r Depend(e), the set of processes that are affected by a nondeterministic event e.

This set consists of p, and any process whose state depends on the event e ac cording to Lamport’s happened before re lation [Lamport 1978].

r Log(e), the set of processes that have logged a copy of e’s determinant in their volatile memory. r Stable(e), a predicate that is true if e’s determinant is logged on stable storage. A process p becomes an orphan when p it self does not fail and p’s state depends on the execution of a nondeterministic event e whose determinant cannot be recovered from stable storage or from the volatile memory of a surviving process. Formally [Alvisi 1996]: ∀ e : ¬ Stable(e) ⇒ Depend(e) ⊆ Log(e) We call this property the always-no orphans condition. It stipulates that if any surviving process depends on an event e, then either the event is logged on stable storage, or the process has a copy of the determinant of event e. If neither condi tion is true, then the process is an orphan because it depends on an event e that can not be generated during recovery since its determinant has been lost. 4.2. Pessimistic Logging 4.2.1. Overview. Pessimistic logging protocols are designed under the assump tion that a failure can occur after any nondeterministic event in the computa tion. This assumption is “pessimistic” since in reality, failures are rare. In their most straightforward form, pessimistic protocols log to stable storage, the deter minant of each nondeterministic event before the event is allowed to affect the computation. These pessimistic proto cols implement the following property, often referred to as synchronous log ging, which is a strengthening of the always-no-orphans condition:

## ∀ e : ¬ Stable(e) ⇒ | Depend(e)| = 0

This property stipulates that if an event has not been logged on stable storage, then no process can depend on it.

390 Elnozahy et al. In addition to logging determinants, processes also take periodic checkpoints to limit the amount of work that has to be repeated in execution replay during re covery. Should a failure occur, the appli cation program is restarted from the most recent checkpoint and the logged determi nants are used during recovery to recreate the pre-failure execution. Consider the example in Figure 10. During failure-free operation the logs of processes P0, P1 and P2 contain the determinants needed to replay messages [m0, m4, m7], [m1, m3, m6] and [m2, m5], respectively. Suppose processes P1 and P2 fail as shown, restart from checkpoints B and C, and roll forward using their de terminant logs to again deliver the same sequence of messages as in the pre-failure execution. This guarantees that P1 and P2 will exactly repeat their pre-failure execution and re-send the same messages. Hence, once recovery is complete, both processes will be consistent with the state of P0 that includes the receipt of message m7 from P1. In a pessimistic logging system, the ob servable state of each process is always re coverable. This property has four advan tages: 1. Processes can send messages to the out side world without running a special protocol. 2. Processes restart from their most re cent checkpoint upon a failure, there fore limiting the extent of execution that has to be replayed. Thus, the frequency of checkpoints can be de termined by trading off the desired runtime performance with the desired protection of the ongoing execution. 3. Recovery is simplified because the ef fects of a failure are confined only to the processes that fail. Functioning pro cesses continue to operate and never be come orphans because a process always recovers to the state that included its most recent interaction with any other process including OWP. This is highly desirable in practical systems [Huang and Wang 1995].

4. Garbage collection is simple. Older checkpoints and determinants of non deterministic events that occurred before the most recent checkpoint can be reclaimed because they will never be needed for recovery. The price to be paid for these advantages is a performance penalty incurred by syn chronous logging. Implementations of pes simistic logging must therefore resort to special techniques to reduce the effects of synchronous logging on performance. Some protocols rely on special hardware to facilitate logging [Borg, et al. 1989], while others may limit the number of tol erated failures to improve performance [Johnson and Zwaenepoel 1987; Juang and Venkatesan 1991].

4.2.2. Techniques for Reducing Performance Overhead. Synchronous logging can po tentially result in a high performance overhead. This overhead can be low ered using special hardware. For example, fast non-volatile semiconductor memory can be used to implement stable storage [Banatre et al. 1988]. Synchronous log- ˆ ging in such an implementation is orders of magnitude cheaper than with a tradi tional implementation of stable storage that uses magnetic disk devices. Another form of hardware support uses a special bus to guarantee atomic logging of all messages exchanged in the system [Borg, et al. 1989]. Such hardware support en sures that the log of one machine is auto matically stored on a designated backup without blocking the execution of the ap plication program. This scheme, however, requires that all nondeterministic events be converted into external messages [Bartlett 1981; Borg, et al. 1989]. Some pessimistic logging systems re duce the overhead of synchronous log ging without relying on hardware. For example, the Sender-Based Message Log ging (SBML) protocol keeps the determi nants corresponding to the delivery of each message m in the volatile memory of its sender [Johnson and Zwaenepoel 1987]. The determinant of m, which consists of its content and the order in which it was

Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems 391

Fig. 10. Pessimistic logging.

delivered, is logged in two steps. First, be fore sending m, the sender logs its content in volatile memory. Then, when the re ceiver of m responds with an acknowledg ment that includes the order in which the message was delivered, the sender adds the ordering information to the determi nant. SBML avoids the overhead of access ing stable storage but tolerates only one failure and cannot handle nondeterminis tic events internal to a process. Extensions to this technique can tolerate more than one failure in special network topologies [Juang and Venkatesan 1991].

4.2.3. Relaxing Logging Atomicity. The performance overhead of pessimistic logging can be reduced by delivering a message or an event and deferring its logging until the receiver communicates with any other process, including OWP [Johnson and Zwaenepoel 1987]. In the example of Figure 10, process P0 may defer the logging of messages m4 and m7 until it communicates with another process or the outside world. Process P0 implements the following weaker property, which still guarantees the always-no-orphans condition:

## ∀ e : ¬ Stable(e) ⇒ | Depend(e)| ≤ 1

This property relaxes the condition of pes simistic logging by allowing a single pro cess to be affected by an event that has yet to be logged, provided that the pro cess does not externalize the effect of this dependency to other processes including OWP. Thus, messages m4and m7 are al lowed to affect process P0, but this effect is local—no other process, or the outside world can see it until the messages are logged. The observed behavior of each process is the same as with an implementation that logs events before delivering them to ap plications. Event logging and delivery are not performed in one atomic operation in this variation of pessimistic logging. This scheme reduces overhead because several events can be logged in one operation, re ducing the frequency of synchronous ac cess to stable storage. Latency of interpro cess communication and output commit, are not reduced since a logging opera tion may often be needed before sending a message. Systems that separate logging of an event from its delivery may lose the last messages delivered before a failure. This may be a problem for applications that assume that processes communicate through reliable channels. Consider one of these applications going through the execution shown in Figure 10, and as sume that process P0 fails after deliver ing messages m4 and m7 but before the corresponding determinants—containing the content and order of receipt of the messages—are logged. Protocols in which the receiver logs the message content can not guarantee that the recovered P0 will ever deliver m4 and m7, violating the

392 Elnozahy et al.

Fig. 11. Optimistic logging.

assumption about reliable channels. This problem does not arise in protocols that log messages at the sender or do not assume reliable communication channels [Elnozahy 1993; Johnson 1989; Johnson and Zwaenepoel 1987].

4.3. Optimistic Logging 4.3.1. Overview. In optimistic logging protocols, processes log determinants asynchronously to stable storage [Strom and Yemini 1985]. These protocols make the optimistic assumption that logging will complete before a failure occurs. De terminants are kept in a volatile log, which is periodically flushed to stable storage. Thus, optimistic logging does not require the application to block waiting for the determinants to be actually written to stable storage, and therefore incurs lit tle overhead during failure-free execution. However, this advantage comes at the ex pense of more complicated recovery and garbage collection, and slower output com mit, than in pessimistic logging. If a pro cess fails, the determinants in its volatile log will be lost, and the state intervals that were started by the nondeterminis tic events corresponding to these determi nants cannot be recovered. Furthermore, if the failed process sent a message dur ing any of the state intervals that cannot be recovered, the receiver of the message becomes an orphan process and must roll back to undo the effects of receiving the message. Optimistic protocols do not im plement the always-no-orphans condition, and therefore permit the temporary cre ation of orphan processes. However, they require that the property holds by the time recovery is complete. This is achieved dur ing recovery by rolling back orphan pro cesses until their states do not depend on any message whose determinant has been lost. For example, suppose process P2 in Figure 11 fails before the determinant for m5 is logged to stable storage. Process P1 then becomes an orphan process and must roll back to undo the effects of receiving the orphan message m6. The rollback of P1 further forces P0 to roll back to undo the effects of receiving message m7. To perform these rollbacks correctly, op timistic logging protocols track causal de pendencies during failure-free execution. Upon a failure, the dependency informa tion is used to calculate and recover the latest global state of the pre-failure execu tion in which no process is in an orphan. The above example also illustrates why optimistic logging protocols require a nontrivial garbage collection algorithm. While pessimistic protocols need only keep the most recent checkpoint of each process, optimistic protocols may need to keep multiple checkpoints. In the exam ple, the failure of P2 forces P1 to restart from checkpoint B instead of its most recent checkpoint D. Finally, since determinants are logged asynchronously, output commit in opti mistic logging protocols generally requires

Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems 393 multi-host coordination to ensure that no failure scenario can revoke the output. For example, if process P0 needs to commit output at state X , it must log messages m4 and m7 to stable storage and ask P2 to log m2 and m5.

4.3.2. Synchronous vs. Asynchronous Re covery. Recovery in optimistic logging protocols can be either synchronous or asynchronous. In synchronous recovery [Johnson 1989; Sistla and Welch 1989], all processes run a recovery protocol to compute the maximum recoverable sys tem state based on dependency and logged information, and then perform the actual rollbacks. During failure-free execution, each process increments a state interval index at the beginning of each state in terval. Dependency tracking can be either direct or transitive. In direct dependency tracking [John son 1989; Sistla and Welch 1989], the state interval index of the sender is piggy backed on each outgoing message to allow the receiver to record the dependency di rectly caused by the message. These direct dependencies can then be assembled at recovery time to obtain complete depen dency information. Alternatively, tran sitive dependency tracking [Sistla and Welch 1989; Strom and Yemini 1985] can be used: each process Pi maintains a size N vector TDi, where TDi[i] is Pi’s current state interval index, and TDi[ j], j 6= i, records the highest index of any state in terval of Pj on which Pi depends. Transi tive dependency tracking generally incurs a higher failure-free overhead for piggy backing and maintaining the dependency vectors, but allows faster output commit and recovery. In asynchronous recovery, a failed pro cess restarts by sending a rollback an nouncement broadcast or a recovery mes sage broadcast to start a new incarnation [Strom and Yemini 1985]. Upon receiv ing a rollback announcement, a process rolls back if it detects that it has become an orphan with respect to that announce ment, and then broadcasts its own roll back announcement. Since rollback an

Fig. 12. Exponential rollbacks.

nouncements from multiple incarnations of the same process may coexist in the system, each process in general needs to track the dependency of its state on ev ery incarnation of all processes to correctly detect orphaned states. A way to limit dependency tracking to only one incarna tion of each process is to force a process to delay its delivery of certain messages. That is, before a process Pi can deliver any message carrying a dependency on an un known incarnation of process Pj , Pi must first receive rollback announcements from Pj to verify that Pi’s current state does not depend on any invalid state of Pj ’s pre vious incarnations. Piggybacking all roll back announcements known to a process on every outgoing message can eliminate blocking, and the amount of piggybacked information can be further reduced to a provable minimum [Smith and Johnson 1996]. Another issue in asynchronous recovery protocols is the possibility of exponential rollbacks. This phenomenon occurs if a sin gle failure causes a process to roll back an exponential number of times [Sistla and Welch 1989]. Figure 12 gives an example, where each integer pair (i, x) represents the xth state interval of the ith incarna tion of a process. Suppose P0 fails and loses its interval (1,2). When P0’s rollback announcement r0 reaches P1, the latter rolls back to interval (2,3) and broadcasts another rollback announcement r1. If r1 reaches P2 before r0 does, P2 will first roll back to (4,5) in response to r1, and later roll back again to (4,4) upon receiving r0. By generalizing this example, we can con struct scenarios in which process Pi, i > 0, rolls back 2 i− 1 times in response to P0’s failure.

394 Elnozahy et al. Several approaches have been proposed to ensure that any process will roll back at most once in response to a single failure. Exponential rollbacks can be eliminated by distinguishing failure announcements from rollback announcements and by broadcasting only the former [Sistla and Welch 1989]. Another possibility is to piggyback the original rollback announce ment from the failed process on every subsequent rollback announcement that it triggers. For example, in Figure 12, pro cess P1 piggybacks r0 on r1. Exponential rollbacks can be avoided by piggybacking all rollback announcements on every application message [Smith and Johnson 1996].

4.4. Causal Logging 4.4.1. Overview. Causal logging has the failure-free performance advantages of optimistic logging while retaining most of the advantages of pessimistic logging [Alvisi 1996; Elnozahy 1993]. Like opti mistic logging, it avoids synchronous ac cess to stable storage except during out put commit. Like pessimistic logging, it allows each process to commit output in dependently and never creates orphans, thereby isolating each process from the ef fects of failures that occur in other pro cesses. Furthermore, causal logging lim its the rollback of any failed process to the most recent checkpoint on stable storage. This reduces the storage overhead and the amount of work at risk. These advantages come at the expense of a more complex re covery protocol. Causal logging protocols ensure the always-no-orphans property by ensuring that the determinant of each nondeter ministic event that causally precedes the state of a process is either stable or it is available locally to that process. Consider the example in Figure 13(a). While mes sages m5 and m6 may be lost upon the fail ure, process P0 at state X will have logged the determinants of the nondeterministic events that causally precede its state ac cording to Lamport’s happened-before re lation [Lamport 1978]. These events con sist of the delivery of messages m0, m1, m2, m3 and m4. The determinant of each of these nondeterministic events is either logged on stable storage or is available in the volatile log of process P0. The determi nant of each of these events contains the order in which its original receiver deliv ered the corresponding message. The mes sage sender, as in sender-based message logging, logs the message content. Thus, process P0 will be able to “guide” the re covery of P1 and P2 since it knows the or der in which P1 should replay messages m1 and m3 to reach the state from which P1 sends message m4. Similarly, P0 has the order in which P2 should replay message m2 to be consistent with both P0 and P1. The content of these messages is obtained from the sender log of P0 or regenerated deterministically during the recovery of P1 and P2. Notice that information about m5 and m6 is not available anywhere. These messages may be replayed after recovery in a different order, if at all. However, since they had no effect on a surviving process or the outside world, the resulting state is consistent. The determinant log kept by each process acts as an insurance to protect it from the failures that occur in other processes. It also allows the process to make its state recoverable by simply logging the information available locally. Thus, a process does not need to run a multi-host protocol to commit output.

4.4.2. Tracking Causality. Causal logging protocols implement the always-no orphans condition by having processes piggyback the non-stable determinants in their volatile log on the messages they send to other processes. On receiving a message, a process first adds any piggybacked determinant to its volatile determinant log and then delivers the message to the application. The Manetho system propagates the causal information in an antecedence graph [Elnozahy 1993]. The antecedence graph provides every process in the sys tem with a complete history of the nonde terministic events that have causal effects on its state. The graph has a node repre senting each nondeterministic event that

Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems 395

Fig. 13. Causal logging (a) Maximum recoverable states, and (b) antecedence graph of P0 at state X .

precedes the state of a process, and the edges correspond to the happened-before relation [Lamport 1978]. Figure 13(b) shows the antecedence graph of process P0 of Figure 13(a) at state X . During failure free operation, each process piggybacks on each application message, the determi nants that contain the receipt orders of its direct and transitive antecedents, — its lo cal antecedence graph. The receiver of the message records these receipt orders in its volatile log. In practice, carrying the entire graph on each application message may lead to an unacceptable overhead. Fortunately, each message carries a graph that is a super set of the one piggybacked on the pre vious message sent from the same host. This fact can be used in practical imple mentations to reduce the amount of infor mation carried on application messages. Thus, any message between processes p and q carries only the difference between the graphs piggybacked on that message and the previous message exchanged be tween these two hosts. Furthermore, if p has recently received a message from q, it can exclude the graph portions that have been piggybacked on that message. Process q already has the information in these excluded portions, therefore trans mitting them serves no purpose. Other op timizations are also possible but depend on the semantics of the communication protocol. An implementation of this tech nique shows that it has very low overhead in practice [Elnozahy 1993]. Further reduction of the overhead is possible if the system is willing to toler ate a number of failures that is less than the total number of processes in the sys tem. This observation is the basis of Fam ily Based Logging protocols (FBL) that are parameterized by the number of tol erated failures [Alvisi 1996]. The basis of these protocols is that, to tolerate f pro cess failures, it is sufficient to log each non deterministic event in the volatile store of f + 1 different hosts. Hence, the predi cate Stable(e) holds as soon as | Log(e)| > f . Sender-based logging is used to support message replay during recovery and de terminants are piggybacked on applica tion messages. However, unlike Manetho, propagation of information about an event stops when it has been recorded in f + 1 processes. For f < N, FBL proto cols do not access stable storage except for checkpointing. Reducing access to sta ble storage in turn reduces performance overhead and implementation complexity. Applications pay only the overhead that corresponds to the number of failures they are willing to tolerate. An implementation for the protocol with f = 1 confirms that the performance overhead is very small [Alvisi 1996]. The Manetho protocol is an FBL protocol corresponding to the case of f = N.

4.5. Comparison Different rollback-recovery protocols offer different tradeoffs with respect to performance overhead, latency of output commit, storage overhead, ease of garbage collection, simplicity of recovery, freedom from domino effect, freedom from orphan processes, and the extent of rollback. Table I summarizes a comparison among the different variations of rollback recovery protocols. Since garbage collection and recovery both involve calculating a recovery line, they can be performed by simple pro cedures under coordinated checkpointing and pessimistic logging, both of which

396 Elnozahy et al.

| | Uncoordinated Checkpointing | Coordinated Checkpointing | Comm. Induced Checkpointing | Pessimistic | Logging | Optimistic Logging | Causal Logging |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| PWD assumed? | No | No | No | | Yes | Yes | Yes |
| Checkpoint/ process | Several | 1 | Several | | 1 | Several | 1 |
| Domino effect | Possible | No | No | | No | No | No |
| Orphan processes | Possible | No | Possible | | No | Possible | No |
| Rollback extent | Unbounded | Last global checkpoint | Possibly several checkpoints | checkpoint | Last | Possibly several checkpoints | Last checkpoint |
| Recovery data | Distributed | Distributed | Distributed | Distributed | local | or Distributed or local | Distributed |
| Recovery protocol | Distributed | Distributed | Distributed | | Local | Distributed | Distributed |
| Output commit | Not possible | Global coordination required | Global coordination required | Local | decision | Global coordination required | Local decision |

Table I. A Comparison Between Various Flavors of Rollback-Recovery Protocols

5. IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES 
5.1. Overview 

have a predetermined recovery line during failure-free execution. The extent of any potential rollback determines the max imum number of checkpoints each pro cess needs to retain. Uncoordinated check pointing can have unbounded rollbacks, and a process may need to retain up to N checkpoints if the optimal garbage collec tion algorithm is used [Wang et al. 1995b]. Also, several checkpoints may need to be kept, under optimistic logging, depending on the specifics of the logging scheme. Note that we do not include failure-free over head as a factor in the comparison. Several studies have shown that these protocols perform reasonably well in practice, and that several factors such as checkpointing frequency, machine speed, and stable stor age bandwidth play more important roles than the fundamental aspects of a partic ular protocol [Alvisi 1996; Elnozahy 1993; Elnozahy, et al. 1992; Huang and Kintala 1993; Johnson 1989; Muller et al. 1994; Plank 1993; Plank, et al. 1995b; Ruffin

While there is a rich body of research on the algorithmic aspects of rollback recovery protocols, reports on experimen tal prototypes or commercial implemen tations are relatively scarce. The few experimental studies available have shown that building rollback-recovery protocols with low failure-free overhead is feasible. These studies also provide ample evidence that the main difficulty in implementing these protocols lies in the complexity of handling recovery [Elnozahy 1993]. It is interesting to note that all commercial implementations of message logging use pessimistic logging because it simplifies recovery [Borg, et al. 1989; Huang and Wang 1995]. Several recent studies have also chal lenged some premises on which many rollback-recovery protocols rely. Many of these protocols were introduced in the 1980’s, as processor speed and network

1992; Silva 1997].

Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems 397 bandwidth were such that communica tion overhead was deemed too high, es pecially as compared to the cost of sta ble storage access [Bhargava et al. 1990]. In such platforms, multi-host coordina tion incurs a large overhead because of the necessary control messages. A pro tocol that does not require a large com munication overhead at the expense of more stable storage accesses performs bet ter in such platforms. Recently, processor speed and network bandwidth have in creased dramatically, while the speed of stable storage access has remained rela tively the same. 2 This change in the equa tion suggests a fresh look at the premises of many rollback-recovery protocols. Re cent results [Alvisi 1996; Elnozahy 1993; Johnson 1989; Muller, et al. 1994; Plank 1993; Silva 1997; Slye and Elnozahy 1998] have shown that:

r Stable storage access is now the ma jor source of overhead in checkpoint ing or message logging systems. Com munication overhead is much lower in comparison. Such changes favor coordi nated checkpointing schemes over mes sage logging or uncoordinated check pointing systems, as they require less access to stable storage and are simpler to implement.

r The case for message logging has become the ability to interact with the outside world, instead of reduc ing the overhead of multi-process co ordination [Elnozahy and Zwaenepoel 1994]. Message logging systems can implement efficient protocols for com mitting output and logging input that are not possible in checkpoint-only systems.

r Recent advances have shown that arbi trary forms of nondeterminism can be supported at a very low overhead in logging systems. Nondeterminism was 2 While semiconductor-based stable storage is becom ing more widely available, the size-cost ratio is too low compared to disk-based stable storage. It appears that for some time to come, disk-based systems will continue to be the medium of choice for storing the large files that are needed in checkpointing and log ging systems.

deemed one of the complexities inherent in message logging systems. In the remainder of this section, we ad dress these and other issues in some detail.

5.2. Checkpointing Implementation All available studies have shown that writing the state of a process to stable stor age is the largest contributor to the per formance overhead [Plank 1993]. The sim plest way to save the state of a process is to suspend execution, save the process’s ad dress space on stable storage, and then re sume execution [Tamir and Sequin 1984]. This scheme can be costly for programs with large address spaces if stable storage is implemented using magnetic disks, as it is the custom. Several techniques exist to reduce this overhead.

5.2.1. Concurrent Checkpointing. All available studies show that concurrent checkpointing greatly reduces the over head of saving the state of a process [Goldberg et al. 1990; Plank 1993]. Concurrent checkpointing relies on the memory protection hardware available in modern computer architectures to continue the execution of the process while its checkpoint is being saved on stable storage. The address space is protected from further modification at the start of a checkpoint and the memory pages are saved to disk concurrently with the program execution. If the program attempts to modify a page, it incurs a protection violation. The checkpointing system copies the page into a separate buffer from which it is saved on stable storage. The original page is unprotected and the application program is allowed to resume. Implementations that do not incorporate concurrent checkpointing may pay a heavy performance overhead unless the checkpointing interval is set to a large value, which in turn would increase the time for rollback.

5.2.2. Incremental Checkpointing. Adding incremental checkpointing [Feldman and

398 Elnozahy et al. Brown 1989] to concurrent checkpoint ing can further reduce the overhead [Elnozahy, et al. 1992]. Incremental check pointing avoids rewriting portions of the process states that do not change between consecutive checkpoints. It can be imple mented by using the dirty-bit of the mem ory protection hardware or by emulating a dirty-bit in software [Babaoglu and Joy 1981]. A public domain package imple menting this technique along with con current checkpointing is available [Plank, et al. 1995b]. Incremental checkpointing can also be extended over several processes. In this technique, the system saves the computed parity or some function of the memory pages that are modified across several pro cesses [Plank and Li 1994]. This technique is very similar to parity computation in RAID disk systems. The parity pages can be saved in volatile memory of some other processes thereby avoiding the need to ac cess stable storage. The storage overhead of this method is very low, and it can be adjusted depending on how many failures the system is willing to tolerate. Another technique for implementing incremental checkpointing is to directly compare the program’s state with the pre vious checkpoint in software, and writing the difference in a new checkpoint [Plank et al. 1995a]. The required storage and computation overhead to perform such a comparison may waste the benefit of in cremental checkpointing. Another varia tion on this technique is to use proba bilistic checkpointing [Nam et al. 1997]. The unit of checkpointing in this scheme is a memory block that is typically much smaller than a memory page. Changes to a memory block are detected by comput ing a signature and comparing it to the corresponding signature in the previous checkpoint. Probabilistic checkpointing is portable, and has lower storage and com putation requirements than required by comparing the checkpoints directly. On the downside, computing a signature to detect changes opens the door for aliasing. This problem occurs when the computed signa ture does not differ from the correspond ing one in the previous checkpoint, even

though the associated memory block has changed. In such a situation, the mem ory block is excluded from the new check point, which therefore becomes erroneous. A probabilistic analysis has shown that the likelihood of aliasing in practice is negligible, but an experimental evaluation has shown that probabilistic checkpoint ing could be unsafe in practice [Elnozahy 1998].

5.2.3. System-level versus User-level Imple mentations. Support for checkpointing can be implemented in the kernel [Bartlett 1981; Borg, et al. 1989; Elnozahy 1993; Johnson 1989], or it can be implemented by a library linked with the user pro gram [Alvisi 1996; Goldberg, et al. 1990; Huang and Kintala 1993; Plank, et al. 1995b]. Kernel-level implementations are more powerful because they can also cap ture kernel data structures that support the user process. However, these imple mentations are necessarily not portable. Checkpointing can also be implemented in user level. System calls that manip ulate memory protection such as mpro tect of UNIX can emulate concurrent and incremental checkpointing. The fork sys tem call of UNIX can implement concur rent checkpointing if the operating system implements fork using copy-on-write pro tection [Goldberg, et al. 1990]. User-level implementations, however, cannot access kernel’s data structures that belong to the process, such as open file descriptors and message buffers, but these data structures can be emulated at user level [Huang and Kintala 1993].

5.2.4. Compiler Support. A compiler can be instrumented to generate code that supports checkpointing [Li and Fuchs 1990]. The compiled program contains code that decides when and what to check point. The advantage of this technique is that the compiler can decide on the variables that must be saved, therefore avoiding unnecessary data. For example, dead variables within a program are not saved in a checkpoint though they have been modified. Furthermore, the compiler

Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems 399 may decide the points during program execution where the amount of state to be saved is small. Despite these promising advantages, there are difficulties with this approach. It is generally undecidable to find the point in program execution most suitable to take a checkpoint. There are, however, several heuristics that can be used. The programmer can provide hints to the com piler about where checkpoints should be inserted or what data variables should be stored [Beguelin et al. 1997; Plank, et al. 1995b]. The compiler may also be trained by running the application in an iterative manner and by observing its be havior [Li and Fuchs 1990]. The observed behavior could help decide the execution points where it would be appropriate to in sert checkpoints. Compiler support could also be simplified in languages that sup port automatic garbage collection [Appel 1989]. The execution point after each ma jor garbage collection provides a conve nient place to take a checkpoint at a min imum cost.

5.2.5. Checkpoint Placement. A large amount of work has been devoted to analyzing and deriving the optimal checkpointing frequency and placement [Chandy and Ramamoorthy 1972]. The problem is usually formulated as an opti mization problem subject to constraints. For instance, a system may attempt to reduce the number of taken checkpoints subject to a certain limit on the amount of expected rollback. Generally, it has been observed in practice that the overhead of checkpointing is usually negligible unless the checkpointing interval is rel atively small, therefore the optimality of checkpoint placement is rarely an issue in practical systems [Elnozahy, et al. 1992].

5.3. Checkpointing Protocols in Comparison Many checkpointing protocols were intro duced at a time when the communica tion overhead far exceeded the overhead of accessing stable storage. Furthermore, the memory available to run processes tended to be small. These tradeoffs nat urally favored uncoordinated checkpoint ing schemes over coordinated ones. Cur rent technological trends however have reversed this tradeoff. In modern systems, the overhead of co ordinating checkpoints is negligible com pared to the overhead of saving the states [Alvisi 1996; Elnozahy 1993; Johnson 1989; Muller, et al. 1994; Plank 1993; Silva 1997]. Using concurrent and incremental checkpointing, the overhead of either co ordinated or uncoordinated checkpointing is essentially the same. Therefore, uncoor dinated checkpointing is not likely to be an attractive technique in practice given the negligible performance gains. These gains do not justify the complexities of finding a consistent recovery line after the failure, the susceptibility to the domino effect, the high storage overhead of sav ing multiple checkpoints of each process, and the overhead of garbage collection. It follows that coordinated checkpointing is superior to uncoordinated checkpoint ing when all aspects are considered on balance. A recent study has also shed some light on the behavior of communication induced checkpointing [Alvisi, et al. 1999]. It presents an analysis of these proto cols based on a prototype implementa tion and validated simulations, showing that communication-induced checkpoint ing does not scale well as the number of processes increases. The occurrence of forced checkpoints at random points within the execution due to communi cation messages makes it very difficult to predict the required amount of sta ble storage for a particular application run. Also, this unpredictability affects the policy for placing local checkpoints and makes communication-induced protocols cumbersome to use in practice. Further more, the study shows that the benefit of autonomy in allowing processes to take lo cal checkpoints at their convenience does not seem to hold. In all experiments, a process takes at least twice as many forced checkpoints as local, autonomous ones.

400 Elnozahy et al. 
5.4. Communication Protocols 
Rollback-recovery complicates the imple 
mentation of protocols used for inter 
process communications. Some protocols 
offer the abstraction of reliable communi 
cation channels such as connection-based 
protocols (e.g. TCP, RPC). Alternatively, 
other protocols offer the abstraction of an 
unreliable datagram service (e.g. UDP). 
Each type of abstraction requires addi 
tional support to operate properly across 
failures and recoveries. 

5.4.1. Location-Independent Identities and Redirection. For all communication pro tocols, a rollback-recovery system must mask the actual identity and location of processes or remote ports from the ap plication program. This masking is nec essary to prevent any application pro gram from acquiring a dependency on the location of a certain process, making it im possible to restart the process on a differ ent machine after a failure. A solution to this problem is to assign a logical, location independent identifier to each process in the system. This scheme also allows the system to appropriately redirect commu nication to a restarting process after a failure [Elnozahy 1993].

5.4.2. Reliable Channel Protocols. After a failure, identity masking and commu nication redirection are sufficient for communication protocols that offer the abstraction of an unreliable channel. Pro tocols that offer the abstraction of reli able channels require additional support. These protocols usually generate a time out upcall to the application program if the process at the other end of the channel has failed. These timeouts should be masked since the failed program will soon restart and resume computation. If such upcalls are allowed to affect the application, then the abstraction of a reliable system is no longer upheld. The application will have to encode the necessary support to com municate with the failed process after it recovers. Masking timeouts should also be cou pled with the ability of the protocol im plementation to reestablish the connec tion with the restarting process (possibly restarting on a different machine). This support includes the ability to clean up the old connection in an orderly manner, and to establish a new connection with the restarting host. Furthermore, messages retransmitted as part of the execution re play of the remote host must be identi fied and, if necessary, suppressed. This requires the protocol implementation to include a form of sequence number that is only used for this purpose. Recovering in-transit messages that are lost because of a failure is another prob lem for reliable communication protocols. In TCP/IP communication style, for in stance, a message is considered delivered once an acknowledgment is received from the remote host. The message itself may linger in the kernel’s buffer for a while be fore the receiving process consumes it. If this process fails, the in-transit messages must be resent to preserve the seman tics of the reliable communication chan nel. Messages must be saved at the sender side for possible retransmission during re covery. This step can be combined in a system that performs sender-based mes sage logging as part of the log mainte nance. In other systems that do not log messages or log messages at the receiver, the copying of each message at the sender side introduces overhead and complexity. The complexity is due to the need for exe cuting some garbage collection algorithm with other sites to reclaim the volatile storage.

5.5. Log-based Recovery 5.5.1. Message Logging Overhead. Mes sage logging introduces three sources of overhead. First, each message must in general be copied to the local memory of the process. Second, the volatile log is reg ularly flushed to stable storage to free up space. Third, message logging nearly doubles the communication bandwidth re quired to run the application for sys tems that implement stable storage via a highly available file system accessible through the network. The first source of

Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems 401 overhead may directly affect communica tion throughput and latency. This is es pecially true if the copying occurs in the critical path of the inter-process commu nication protocol. In this respect, sender based logging is considered more efficient than receiver-based logging because the copying can take place after sending the message over the network. Additionally, the system may combine the logging of messages with the implementation of the communication protocol and share the message log with the transmission buffers. This scheme avoids the extra copying of the message. Logging at the receiver is more expensive because it is in the criti cal path of the communication protocol. Another optimization for sender-based logging systems is to use copy-on-write to avoid making extra-copying [Elnozahy and Zwaenepoel 1994]. This scheme works well in systems where broadcast messages are implemented using several point-to point messages. In this case, copy-on-write will allow the system to have one copy for identical messages and thus reduce the storage and performance overhead of logging. No similar optimization can be performed in receiver-based systems [Elnozahy and Zwaenepoel 1994].

5.5.2. Combining Log-Based Recovery with Coordinated Checkpointing. Log-based re covery has been traditionally presented as a mechanism to allow the use of unco ordinated checkpointing with no domino effect. But a system may also combine event logging with coordinated check pointing, yielding several benefits with respect to performance and simplicity [Elnozahy and Zwaenepoel 1994]. These benefits include those of coordinated checkpointing—such as the simplicity of recovery and garbage collection—and those of log-based recovery—such as fast output commit. Most prominently, this combination obviates the need for flushing the volatile message logs to stable storage in a sender-based logging implementa tion. Thus, there is no need for main taining large logs on stable storage, re sulting in lower performance overhead and simpler implementations. The combi nation of coordinated checkpointing and message logging has been shown to out perform one with uncoordinated check pointing and message logging [Elnozahy and Zwaenepoel 1994]. Therefore, the pur pose of logging should no longer be to al low uncoordinated checkpointing. Rather, it should be the desire for enabling fast output commit for those applications that need this feature.

5.6. Stable Storage Magnetic disks have been the medium of choice for implementing stable storage [Lampson and Sturgis 1979]. Although they are slow, their storage capacity and low cost combination cannot be matched by other alternatives. An implementation of a stable storage abstraction on top of a conventional file system may not be the best choice, however. Such an imple mentation will not generally give the per formance or reliability needed to imple ment stable storage [Banatre, et al. 1988; ˆ Elnozahy 1993; Ruffin 1992]. Modern file systems tend to be optimized for the pat tern of access expected in workstation or personal computing environments. Fur thermore, these file systems are often ac cessed through a network via a protocol that is optimized for small file accesses and not for the large file accesses that are more common in checkpointing and logging. An implementation of stable storage should bypass the file system layer and access the disk directly. One such imple mentation is the KitLog package, which offers a log abstraction that can sup port checkpointing and message logging [Ruffin 1992]. The package runs in con ventional UNIX systems and bypasses the file system by accessing the disk in raw mode. There have also been several at tempts at implementing stable storage us ing non-volatile semiconductor memory [Banatre, et al. 1988]. Such implementa- ˆ tions do not have the performance prob lems associated with disks, but the price and the small storage capacity remain two problems that limit their wide acceptance.

402 Elnozahy et al. 
5.7. Support for Nondeterminism 
Nondeterminism occurs when the applica 
tion program interacts with the operating 
system through system calls and upcalls 
(asynchronous events). In log-based recov 
ery, these nondeterministic events must 
be logged on stable storage so that they can 
be replayed during recovery. Log-based re 
covery systems differ in the range of actual 
events that can be covered. 

5.7.1. System Calls. System calls in general can be classified into three types [Borg, et al. 1989; Elnozahy 1993; Goldberg, et al. 1990]. Idempotent system calls are those that return deterministic values whenever executed. Examples in clude calls that return the user identifier of the process owner. These calls do not need to be logged. A second class of calls consists of those that must be logged dur ing failure-free operation but should not be re-executed during execution replay. The results from these calls should simply be replayed to the application program. These calls include those that inquire about the environment, such as getting the current time of day. Re-executing these calls during recovery might return a different value that is inconsistent with the pre-failure execution. The last type of system calls includes those that must be logged during failure-free oper ation and re-executed during execution replay. These calls generally modify the environment and therefore they must be re-executed to re-establish the environ ment changes. Examples include calls that allocate memory or create processes. Ensuring that these calls return the same values and generate the same effect during re-execution can be very complex.

5.7.2. Asynchronous Signals. Nonde terminism results from asynchronous signals available in the form of soft ware interrupts under various operating systems. Such signals must be applied at the same execution points during replay to reproduce the same result. Log-based rollback-recovery can cover this form of nondeterminism by taking a checkpoint after the occurrence of each signal, but this can be very expensive [Bartlett 1981]. Alternatively, the system may convert these asynchronous signals to synchronous messages such as in Targon/32 [Borg, et al. 1989], or it may queue the signals until the application polls for them. Both alternatives convert asynchronous event notifications into syn chronous ones, which may not be suitable or efficient for many applications. Such solutions also may require substantial modifications to the operating system or the application program. Another example of nondeterminism that is difficult to track is shared memory manipulation in multithreaded applica tions. Reconstructing the same execution during replay requires the same interleav ing of shared memory accesses by the vari ous threads as in the pre-failure execution. Systems that support this form of nonde terminism supply their own sets of locking primitives, and require applications to use them for protecting access to shared mem ory [Goldberg, et al. 1990]. The primitives are instrumented to insert an entry in the log identifying the calling thread and the nature of the synchronization operation. However, this technique has several prob lems. It makes shared memory access ex pensive, and may generate a large volume of data in the log. Furthermore, if the ap plication does not adhere to the synchro nization model (because of a programmer’s error, for instance), execution replay may not be possible. A technique for tracking nondetermin ism due to asynchronous signals and interleaved memory access on single pro cessor systems is to use instruction coun ters [Bressoud and Schneider 1995]. An instruction counter is a register that decrements by one upon the execution of each instruction, leading the hardware to generate an exception when the register contents become 0. An instruction counter can thus be used in two modes. In one mode, the register is loaded with the num ber of instructions to be executed before a breakpoint occurs. After the CPU exe cutes the specified number of instructions, the counter reaches 0 and the hardware

Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems 403 generates an exception. The operating sys tem fields the exception and executes a pre-specified handler. This mode is use ful in setting breakpoints efficiently, such as during debugging. In the second mode, the instruction counter is loaded with the maximum value it can hold. Execution proceeds until an event of interest oc curs, at which time the content of the counter is sampled, and the number of instructions executed since the time the counter was set is computed and logged. The use of instruction counters has been suggested for debugging shared memory parallel programs [Mellor-Crummey and LeBlanc 1989]. Instruction counters can be used in rollback-recovery to track the number of instructions that occur between asyn chronous interrupts [Slye and Elnozahy 1998]. These instruction counts are logged as part of the log that describes the non deterministic events. During recovery, the system recovers the instruction counts from the log and uses them to regener ate the software interrupts at the same execution points within the application as before the failure. The application there fore goes through the same set of asyn chronous events precisely as it did before the failure, and therefore it can recon struct its execution. An instruction counter can be imple mented in hardware, as in the PA-RISC precision architecture where it has been used to augment the hypervisor of a virtual-machine manager and coordinate a primary virtual machine with its backup [Bressoud and Schneider 1995]. It also can be emulated in software [Mellor-Crummey and LeBlanc 1989]. An implementation study shows that the overhead of program instrumentation and tracking nondeter minism is less than 6% for a variety of user programs and synthetic benchmarks [Slye and Elnozahy 1998].

5.8. Dependency Tracking Rollback-recovery protocols vary in the ways they track inter-process dependen cies. Some protocols require tagging only an index or a sequence number on ev ery application message [Briatico, et al. 1984], while some require the propaga tion of a vector of timestamps [Strom and Yemini 1985]. At an extreme, some pro tocols require the propagation of a graph describing the history of the computation [Elnozahy 1993], or matrices containing bit or timestamp vectors [Baldoni, et al. 1998]. Tagging a message with an index or a sequence number on an application mes sage is simple and does not cause any measurable overhead. When dependency tracking, however, requires more complex structures, there are techniques for reduc ing the amount of actual data that need to be transferred on top of each message. All these techniques revolve around two themes. First, only incremental changes need to be sent. If some elements of a vector or a graph haven’t changed since process p last sent a message to process q, then p need only include those ele ments that have changed. Implementa tion of this optimization is straightforward in systems that assume FIFO communi cation channels. When lossy channels are assumed, this optimization is still possi ble, but at the expense of more processing overhead [Elnozahy 1993]. The other technique for reducing the overhead of dependency tracking exploits the semantics of the applications and the communication patterns [Elnozahy 1993]. For instance, if it can be inferred from the dependency information available to process p that process q already knows parts of the information that is to be pig gybacked on a message outgoing to q, then process p can exclude this information. Surprisingly, implementing this optimiza tion is simple and yields good performance [Elnozahy 1993]. Regardless of the partic ular method used to track inter-process de pendencies, various prototype implemen tations have shown that the overhead resulting from dependency tracking is negligible compared to the overhead of checkpointing or logging [Alvisi 1996; Alvisi, et al. 1999; Bhargava and Lian 1988; Borg, et al. 1989; Elnozahy 1993; Goldberg, et al. 1990; Johnson 1989; Silva 1997].

404 Elnozahy et al. 
5.9. Recovery 
Handling execution restart and replay is a 
difficult part of implementing a rollback 
recovery system [Borg, et al. 1989]. The 
major challenge is reintegrating the re 
covered process in a computation environ 
ment that may or may not be the same as 
the one in which the process was executing 
before failure. 

5.9.1. Reinstating a Process in its Environ ment. Implanting a process in a different environment during recovery can create difficulties if its state depends on the pre failure environment. For example, the pro cess may need to access files that exist on the local disk of the machine. The simplest solution to this problem is to attempt to restart the program on the same host. If this is not feasible, then the system must insulate the process from environment specific variables [Elnozahy 1993]. This can be done for instance by intercept ing system calls that return environment specific results and replacing them with abstract values under the control of the recovery system. Also, file access could be made highly available by placing all files in network-wide highly avail able file servers or by using dual-ported disks. Another problem in implementing re covery is the need to reconstruct the auxil iary state within the operating system ker nel that supports the recovering process [Elnozahy 1993; Huang and Kintala 1993; Johnson 1989; Plank 1993]. This state is usually outside of the recovery protocol’s control during failure-free operation, un less the protocol is implemented inside the operating system. For protocols im plemented outside the operating system, the rollback-recovery system must emu late these data structures and log suffi cient information to be able to recreate them during recovery. For example, the re covery system may create a data structure to shadow the open file table of a particu lar process by intercepting all file manip ulation calls from the process itself. Then, the recovery system records some informa tion that would enable it to issue requests to the operating system during recovery in order to force the operating system to recreate these data structures indirectly. Obviously, not all states within the oper ating system kernel can be emulated this way, and therefore, out-of-kernel imple mentations should have stricter coverage of the system’s state that must be emu lated. Since most of the applications that benefit from rollback-recovery seem to be in the realm of scientific computing where no sophisticated state is maintained by the kernel on behalf of the processes, this problem does not seem to be severe in that particular context [Plank, et al. 1995b].

5.9.2. Behavior During Recovery. Previous studies have outlined several character istics of rollback-recovery systems during recovery [Elnozahy 1993; Rao et al. 1998]. For example, it has been observed that for log-based recovery systems, the messages and determinants available in the logs are replayed at a considerably higher speed during recovery than during normal exe cution. This is because during normal exe cution, a process may have to block waiting for messages or synchronization events, while during recovery these messages or events can be immediately replayed. Also, it has been observed that sender based logging protocols typically slow down recovery if there are multiple fail ures, because of the need to re-execute some of the processes under control to re generate the messages. Moreover, some of these protocols may require sympathetic rollbacks [Strom and Yemini 1985], which increase the overhead of synchronizing the processes during recovery. This ex perimental evidence seems to confirm the tradeoff between protocols that perform well during failure-free executions, such as causal and optimistic logging, and pro tocols that perform well during recovery, such as pessimistic logging [Rao, et al. 1998]. It is possible to address this tradeoff by performing logging both at the sender and receivers [Strom and Yemini 1985], such that the sender log is volatile and is kept only until the receiver flushes its volatile logs to stable storage.

Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems 405 5.10. Checkpointing and Mobility Several studies have examined the issues of checkpointing, logging, and rollback recovery in mobile computing [Prakash and Singhal 1996]. The fundamental con cepts of distributed checkpointing, consis tency, and rollback are identical to those in traditional distributed systems, but spe cial considerations must be made for is sues inherent to mobile computing, such as energy constraints, intermittent com munications, and low-performance pro cessors. These issues favor checkpointing protocols that allow maximum autonomy to participating processes, require low overhead in resources, and can function with the minimum possible number of message exchanges. Therefore, indepen dent checkpointing and communication induced checkpointing tend to be more appropriate for these environments than coordinated checkpointing. Also, log-based recovery protocols that allow a high de gree of autonomy during recovery such as receiver-based optimistic or pessimistic logging tend to be more appropriate for these environments than those protocols that require global communication dur ing recovery. Nevertheless, checkpoint ing and rollback-recovery have yet to prove useful for mobile hosts. The ap plications in the mobile domain tend to be structured as client-server inter actions for which transaction processing on the server is most appropriate. Also, it is often the case for these applica tions that high availability is more im portant than fault tolerance or recover ability, favoring some form of replicated server that can continue to function de spite a failure of some of its replicas. Finally, there is an emerging generation of handheld devices that are meant to serve as enhanced input-output devices for remote computations, with little process ing or storage capacity to support check pointing or recovery. Whether this situ ation changes, will depend on whether rollback-recovery proves to be useful out side the scientific and engineering com puting domain in which it has proved very successful.

5.11. Rollback-Recovery in Practice Despite the wealth of research in the area of rollback-recovery in distributed sys tems, very few commercial systems actu ally have adopted it. Difficulties in imple menting recovery perhaps are the main reason why these protocols have not been widely adopted. Additionally, the range of applications that benefit from these protocols tend to be in the realm of long running, scientific programs, which are relatively few. Many of these, in fact, are written to run on supercomputers where some facility exists for checkpoint ing the entire system’s state. For the few that run in a distributed system, public do main libraries that implement checkpoint ing have proved adequate [Plank, et al. 1995b]. Log-based recovery seemed to have less success than checkpoint-only systems. A commercial implementation of pessimistic logging did not fare well, although the rea sons are not clear [Borg, et al. 1989]. One could conjecture that the complex modifi cations made to the operating system and the special-purpose hardware that was used to mitigate performance overhead made the machine expensive. Some other usage of log-based recovery has been re ported in telecommunication applications [Huang and Kintala 1993], although there are no reports on how they fared. Interest ingly, both commercial implementations used pessimistic logging, and were used for applications where the performance overhead of this form of logging could be tolerated. We are unaware, however, of any use of optimistic or causal logging rollback-recovery protocols in commercial systems.

6. CONCLUDING REMARKS We have reviewed and compared differ ent approaches to rollback-recovery with respect to a set of properties including the assumption of piecewise determinism, performance overhead, storage overhead, ease of output commit, ease of garbage collection, ease of recovery, freedom from domino effect, freedom from orphan

406 Elnozahy et al.

processes, and the extent of rollback. These approaches fall into two broad cat egories: checkpointing protocols and log based recovery protocols. Checkpointing protocols require the processes to take periodic checkpoints with varying degrees of coordination. At one end of the spectrum, coordi nated checkpointing requires the pro cesses to coordinate their checkpoints to form global consistent system states. Co ordinated checkpointing generally simpli fies recovery and garbage collection, and yields good performance in practice. At the other end of the spectrum, uncoordi nated checkpointing does not require the processes to coordinate their checkpoints, but it suffers from potential domino effect, complicates recovery, and still requires coordination to perform output commit or garbage collection. Between these two ends are communication-induced check pointing schemes that depend on the com munication patterns of the applications to trigger checkpoints. These schemes do not suffer from the domino effect and do not require coordination. Recent studies, however, have shown that the nondeter ministic nature of these protocols compli cates garbage collection and degrades per formance. Log-based rollback-recovery is often a natural choice for applications that fre quently interact with the outside world. It allows efficient output commit, and has three flavors, pessimistic, optimistic, and causal. The simplicity of pessimistic logging makes it attractive for practical applications where a high failure-free overhead is tolerable. This form of logging simplifies recovery, output commit, and protects surviving processes from having to roll back. These advantages have made pessimistic logging attractive in commer cial environments where simplicity and robustness are necessary. Causal logging reduces the overhead while still preserv ing the properties of fast output commit and orphan-free recovery. Alternatively, optimistic logging reduces the overhead further at the expense of complicating re covery and increasing the extent of roll back upon a failure.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors wish to express their sincere thanks to Pi-Yu Chung, Om Damani, W. Kent Fuchs, Yennun Huang, Chandra Kintala, Andy Lowry, Keith Marzullo, James Plank, Fred Schneider and Paulo Verissimo for valuable discussions, encouragement and comments.

REFERENCES ALVISI, L. 1996. Understanding the Message Log ging Paradigm for Masking Process Crashes. Ph.D. Thesis, Cornell University, Department of Computer Science. ALVISI, L. AND MARZULLO, K. 1998. Message log ging: pessimistic, optimistic, causal and optimal. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 24, 2, 149–159. ALVISI, L., ELNOZAHY, E. N., RAO, S., HUSAIN, S. A., and MEL, A. D. 1999. An analysis of communication-induced checkpointing. In Di gest of Papers, FTCS-29, The Twenty Nineth Annual International Symposium on Fault Tolerant Computing (Madison, Wisconsin), 242– 249. APPEL, A. W. 1989. A runtime system. Technical Report CS-TR220-89, Department of Computer Science, Princeton University. BABAOGLU, O. AND JOY, W. 1981. Converting a swap based system to do paging in an architecture lacking page-reference bits. In Proceedings of the Eighth ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, 78–86. BALDONI, R., QUAGLIA, F., AND CICIANI, B. 1998. A VP-accordant checkpointing protocol prevent ing useless checkpoints. In Proceedings, Sev enteenth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 61–67. BANATRE ˆ , J. P., BANATRE ˆ , M., AND MULLER, G. 1988. Ensuring data security and integrity with a fast stable storage. In Proceedings of The Fourth Con ference on Data Engineering, 285–293. BARTLETT, J. F. 1981. A Non Stop Kernel. In Pro ceedings of the Eighth ACM Symposium on Op erating Systems Principles, 22–29. BEGUELIN, A., SELIGMAN, E., AND STEPHAN, P. 1997. Application-level fault tolerance in heteroge neous networks of workstations. J. Parallel and Distributed Comput. 43, 2, 147–155. BHARGAVA, B. AND LIAN, S. R. 1988. Indepen dent checkpointing and concurrent rollback for recovery—An optimistic approach. In Pro ceedings, Seventh Symposium on Reliable Dis tributed Systems, 3–12. BHARGAVA, B., LIAN, S. R., AND LEU, P. J. 1990. Ex perimental evaluation of concurrent checkpoint ing and rollback-recovery algorithms. In Pro ceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Data Engineering, 182–189. BORG, A., BLAU, W., GRAETSCH, W., HERMANN, F., AND OBERLE, W. 1989. Fault tolerance

Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems 407

under UNIX. ACM Trans. Comput. Syst. 7, 1, 1–24. BRESSOUD, T. C. AND SCHNEIDER, F. B. 1995. Hypervisor-based fault tolerance. In Proceedings of the Fifteenth ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, 1–11. BRIATICO, D., CIUFFOLETTI, A., AND SIMONCINI, L. 1984. A distributed domino-effect free recovery algo rithm. In IEEE International Symposium on Re liability, Distributed Software, and Databases, 207–215. CHANDY, M. AND RAMAMOORTHY, C. V. 1972. Rollback and recovery strategies for computer programs. IEEE Trans. Comput. 21, 6, 546–556. CHANDY, M. AND LAMPORT, L. 1985. Distributed snapshots: Determining global states of dis tributed systems. ACM Trans. Comput. Syst. 31, 1, 63–75. CRISTIAN, F. AND JAHANIAN, F. 1991. A timestamp based checkpointing protocol for long-lived dis tributed computations. In Proceedings, Tenth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 12–20. ELNOZAHY, E. N. 1993. Manetho: Fault Tolerance in Distributed Systems using Rollback-Recovery and Process Replication. Ph.D. Thesis, Rice Uni versity, Department of Computer Science. ELNOZAHY, E. N. 1998. How safe is probabilistic checkpointing? In Digest of Papers, FTCS-28, the Twenty Eight Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 358–363. ELNOZAHY, E. N. AND ZWAENEPOEL, W. 1994. On the use and implementing of message logging. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-24, The Twenty Fourth International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 298–307. ELNOZAHY, E. N., JOHNSON, D. B., AND ZWAENEPOEL, W. 1992. The performance of consistent check pointing. In Proceedings, Eleventh Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 39–47. FELDMAN, S. I. AND BROWN, C. B. 1989. Igor: A sys tem for program debugging via reversible execu tion. ACM SIGPLAN Notices, Workshop on Par allel and Distributed Debugging 24, 1, 112–123. GOLDBERG, A., GOPAL, A., LI, K., STROM, R., AND BACON, D. 1990. Transparent recovery of Mach appli cations. In Usenix Mach Workshop Proceedings, 169–184. HELARY ´ , J. M., MOSTEFAOUI, A., AND RAYNAL, M. 1997a. Virtual precedence in asynchronous systems: concepts and applications. In Proceedings of the 11th Workshop on Distributed Algorithms, WDAG’97. HELARY ´ , J. M., MOSTEFAOUI, A., NETZER, R. H., AND RAYNAL, M. 1997b. Preventing useless check points in distributed computations. In Proceed ings, Sixteenth Symposium on Reliable Dis tributed Systems, 183–190. HUANG, Y. AND KINTALA, C. 1993. Software imple mented fault tolerance: Technologies and ex perience. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-23, the

Twenty Third Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 2–9. HUANG, Y. AND WANG, Y.-M. 1995. Why optimistic message logging has not been used in telecom munication systems. In Digest of Papers, FTCS 25, the Twenty Fifth Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 459– 463. JOHNSON, D. B. 1989. Distributed System Fault Tolerance Using Message Logging and Check pointing. Ph.D. Thesis, Rice University, Depart ment of Computer Science. JOHNSON, D. B. AND ZWAENEPOEL, W. 1987. Sender based message logging. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-17, The Seventeenth Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 14– 19. JOHNSON, D. B. AND ZWAENEPOEL, W. 1990. Recovery in distributed systems using optimistic message logging and checkpointing. J. Algorithms 11, 3, 462–491. JUANG, T. T.-Y. AND VENKATESAN, S. 1991. Crash re covery with little overhead. In Proceedings, The 11th International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, 454–461. KOO, R. AND TOUEG, S. 1987. Checkpointing and rollback-recovery for distributed systems. IEEE Trans. Softw. Engin. 13, 1, 23–31. LAI, T. H. AND YANG, T. H. 1987. On distributed snapshots. Information Processing Letters 25, 153–158. LAMPORT, L. 1978. Time, clocks, and the ordering of events in a distributed system. Commun. ACM 21, 7, 588–565. LAMPSON, B. W. AND STURGIS, H. E. 1979. Crash re covery in a distributed data storage system. Tech nical Report, Xerox Palo Alto Research Center. LI, C. C. AND FUCHS, W. K. 1990. CATCH: Compiler assisted techniques for checkpointing. In Di gest of Papers, FTCS-20, The Twentieth Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 74–81. MELLOR-CRUMMEY, J. AND LEBLANC, T. 1989. A soft ware instruction counter. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Oper ating Systems, 78–86. MORIN, C. AND PUAUT, T. 1997. A survey of recover able distributed shared memory systems. IEEE Trans. Parallel and Distributed Syst. 8, 9, 959– 969. MULLER, G., HUE, M., AND PEYROUZ, N. 1994. Per formance of consistent checkpointing in a mod ular operating system: Results of the FTM ex periment. In Lecture Notes in Computer Science: Dependable Computing, EDDC-1, 491–508. NAM, H.-C., KIM, J., HONG, S. J., AND LEE, S. 1997. Probabilistic checkpointing. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-27, The Twenty Seventh Annual Interna tional Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 48–57.

408 Elnozahy et al.

NETZER, R. H. AND XU, J. 1995. Necessary and suffi cient conditions for consistent global snapshots. IEEE Trans. Parallel and Distributed Syst. 6, 2, 165–169. PAUSCH, R. 1988. Adding Input and Output to the Transactional Model. Ph.D. Thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Computer Science. PLANK, J. S. 1993. Efficient Checkpointing on MIMD Architectures. Ph.D. Thesis, Princeton University, Department of Computer Science. PLANK, J. S. AND LI, K. 1994. Faster checkpointing with N + 1 parity. In Digest of Papers, FTCS 24, The Twenty Fourth Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 288– 297. PLANK, J. S., XU, J., AND NETZER, R. H. 1995a. Com pressed differences: An algorithm for fast incre mental checkpointing. Technical Report CS-95-302, University of Tennessee at Knoxville. PLANK, J. S., BECK, M., KINGSLEY, G., AND LI, K. 1995b. Libckpt: Transparent checkpoint ing under UNIX. In Proceedings of the USENIX Winter 1995 Technical Conference, 213–223. PRAKASH, R. AND SINGHAL, M. 1996. Low-cost check pointing and failure recovery in mobile com puting systems. IEEE Trans. Parallel and Dis tributed Syst. 7, 10, 1035–1048. RANDELL, B. 1975. System structure for software fault tolerance. IEEE Trans. Softw. Engin. 1, 2, 220–232. RAO, S., ALVISI, L., AND VIN, H. M. 1998. The cost of recovery in message logging protocols. In Pro ceedings, Seventeenth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 10–18. RUFFIN, M. 1992. KITLOG: A generic logging ser vice. In Proceedings, Eleventh Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 139–148. RUSSELL, D. L. 1980. State restoration in systems of communicating processes. IEEE Trans. Softw. Engin. 6, 2, 183–194. SCHLICHTING, R. D. AND SCHNEIDER, F. B. 1983. Fail-stop processors: An approach to designing fault-tolerant computing systems. ACM Trans. Comput. Syst. 1, 3, 222–238.

SILVA, L. M. 1997. Checkpointing Mechanisms for Scientific Parallel Applications. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Coimbra, Department of Computer Science. SISTLA, A. AND WELCH, J. 1989. Efficient dis tributed recovery using message logging. In Pro ceedings of the 8th Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC), 223–238. SLYE, J. H. AND ELNOZAHY, E. N. 1998. Support for software interrupts in log-based rollback recovery. IEEE Trans. Comput. 47, 10, 1113– 1123. SMITH, S. W. AND JOHNSON, D. B. 1996. Minimizing timestamp size for completely asynchronous op timistic recovery with minimal rollback. In Pro ceedings, the Fifteenth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 66–75. STROM, R. AND YEMINI, S. 1985. Optimistic recov ery in distributed systems. ACM Trans. Comput. Syst. 3, 3, 204–226. TAMIR, Y. AND SEQUIN, C. H. 1984. Error recovery in multicomputers using global checkpoints. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Parallel Processing, 32–41. TONG, Z., KAIN, R. Y., AND TSAI, W. T. 1992. Rollback-recovery in distributed systems using loosely synchronized clocks. IEEE Trans. Paral lel and Distributed Syst. 3, 2, 246–251. WANG, Y.-M. 1993. Space Reclamation for Un coordinated Checkpointing in Message-Passing Systems. Ph.D. Thesis, University of Illinois, Department of Computer Science. WANG, Y.-M. 1997. Consistent global checkpoints that contain a set of local checkpoints. IEEE Trans. Comput. 46, 4, 456–468. WANG, Y.-M., CHUNG, P. Y., AND FUCHS, W. K. 1995a. Tight upper bound on useful distributed sys tem checkpoints. Technical Report, University of Illinois. WANG, Y.-M., CHUNG, P. Y., LIN, I. J., AND FUCHS, W. K. 1995b. Checkpoint space reclamation for un coordinated checkpointing in message-passing systems. IEEE Trans. Parallel and Distributed Syst. 6, 5, 546–554.

Received October 1996; revised June 1997, June 1999, February 2001; accepted April 2002

Rollback-Recovery Protocols in Message-Passing Systems

BIBLIOGRAPHY

ACHARYA, A. AND BADRINATH, B. R. 1992. Recording distributed snapshots based on causal order of message delivery. Information Processing Letters 44, 6. ACHARYA, A. AND BADRINATH, B. R. 1994. Check pointing distributed applications on mobile com puters. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Informa tion Systems. AHAMAD, M. AND LIN, L. 1989. Using checkpoints to localize the effects of faults in distributed systems. In Proceedings, Eighth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 2–11. AHUJA, M. 1989. Repeated global snapshots in asynchronous distributed systems. Technical Re port OSU-CISRC-8/89 TR40, The Ohio State University. ALGUDADY, M. S. AND DAS, C. R. 1991. A cache based checkpointing scheme for MIN-based multiprocessors. In Proceedings of the Inter national Conference on Parallel Processing, 497–500. ALVISI, L. AND MARZULLO, K. 1995. Message log ging: Pessimistic, optimistic and causal. In Pro ceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (Vancouver, Canada). ALVISI, L. AND MARZULLO, K. 1995. Deriving op timal checkpointing protocols for distributed shared memory architectures. In Proceedings of the 1995 ACM SIGACT-SIGOPS Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC) (Ottawa, Canada). ALVISI, L. AND MARZULLO, K. 1996. Tradeoffs in im plementing causal message logging protocols. In Proceedings of the 1996 ACM SIGACT-SIGOPS Symposium on Principles of Distributed Com puting (PODC), 58–67. ALVISI, L., HOPPE, B., AND MARZULLO, K. 1993. Non blocking and orphan-free message logging pro tocols. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-23, The Twenty Third Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing (Toulouse, France), 145–154. ALVISI, L., RAO, S., AND VIN, H. M. 1998. Low overhead protocols for fault-tolerant file sharing. In Proceedings of the IEEE 18th International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, 452–461. ALVISI, L., BHATIA, K., AND MARZULLO, K. 2000. Tracking causality in causal message logging protocols. Technical Report, The University of Texas at Austin. ALVISI, L., BRESSOUD, T. C., EL-KHASHAB, A., MARZULLO, K., AND ZAGORODNOV, D. 2001. Wrapping

server-side TCP to mask connection failures. In InfoComm. ANYANWU, J. A. 1985. A reliable stable storage sys tem for UNIX. Software–Practice and Experience 15, 10, 973–900. ARTSY, Y. AND FINKEL, R. 1989. Designing a pro cess migration facility: The Charlotte experi ence. IEEE Computer, 47–56. ATTIG, N. AND SANDER, V. 1993. Automatic check pointing of NQS batch jobs on CRAY UNICOS. In Proceedings of the Cray User Group Meeting. BABAOGLU, O. 1990. Fault-tolerant computing based on Mach. In Proceedings of the USENIX Mach Symposium, 186–199. BABAOGLU, O. AND MARZULLO, K. 1993. Consistent global states of distributed systems: Fundamen tal concepts and mechanisms. In Mullender, S. ed. Distributed Systems, Addison-Wesley, 55–96. BACON, D. 1991. Transparent recovery in dis tributed systems. Operating Systems Review, 91–94. BACON, D. 1991. File system measurements and their application to the design of efficient oper ation logging algorithms. In Proceedings, Tenth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 21–30. BALDONI, R., QUAGLIA, F., AND FORNARA, P. 1997. An index-based checkpointing algorithm for au tonomous distributed systems. In Proceedings, Sixteenth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 27–34. BALDONI, R., HELARY ´ , J.-M., MOSTEFAOUI, A., AND RAYNAL, M. 1997. A communication-induced checkpointing protocol that ensures rollback dependency trackability. In Digest of Papers, (FTCS-27), The Twenty Seventh Annual Interna tional Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing (Seattle), 68–77. BALDONI, R., HELARY ´ , J.-M., MOSTEFAOUI, A., AND RAY NAL, M. 1997. Adaptive checkpointing in mes sage passing distributed systems. International Journal of Systems Science 28, 11, 1145–1161. BALDONI, R., HELARY ´ , J.-M., MOSTEFAOUI, A., AND RAYNAL, M. 1997. Adaptive checkpointing in message passing distributed systems. Interna tional Journal of Systems Science 28, 11, 1145– 1161. BANATRE ˆ , J. P., BANATRE ˆ , M., AND MULLER, G. 1989. Architecture of fault-tolerant multiprocessor workstations. In Proceedings of the Workshop on Workstation Operating Systems, 20–24. BANATRE ˆ , M., HENG, P., MULLER, G., AND ROCHARD, B. 1991. How to design reliable servers us ing fault-tolerant micro-kernel mechanisms.

ACM Computing Surveys, Vol. 34, No. 3, September 2002, pp. 1–10.

2 Elnozahy et al.

In Proceedings of the USENIX Mach Sympo sium, 223–231. BANATRE ˆ , M., GEFFLAUT, A., JOUBERT, P., LEE, P., AND MORIN, C. 1993. An architecture for tol erating processor failures in shared-memory multiprocessors. Technical Report No. 707–93, IRISA. BARIGAZZI, G. AND STRIGINI, L. 1983. Application transparent setting of recovery points. In Di gest of Papers, FTCS-13, The Thirteenth Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 48–55. BECK, M., PLANK, J. S., AND KINGSLEY, G. 1994. Compiler-assisted checkpointing. Technical Report CS-94-269, University of Tennessee at Knoxville, Department of Computer Science. BEEDUBAIL, G., KARMARKAR, A., GURIJALA, A., MARTI, W., AND POOCH, U. 1995. An algorithm for supporting fault-tolerant objects in distributed object oriented operating systems. In Proceed ings of the Fourth International Workshop on Object-Orientation in Operating Systems (IWOOOS’95), 142–148. BHATIA, K., MARZULLO, K., AND ALVISI, L. 1998. The relative overhead of piggybacking in causal message logging protocols. In Proceedings, Sev enteenth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 348–353. BIEKER, B., DEONINCK, G., MAEHLE, E., AND VOUNCKX, J. 1994. Reconfiguration and checkpointing in massively parallel systems. In Proceedings of the 1st European Dependant Computing Confer ence (EDCC-1), 353–370. BORG, A., BAUMBACH, J., AND GLAZER, S. 1983. A message system supporting fault tolerance. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Symposium on Op erating System Principles, 90–99. BOWEN, N. S., AND PRADHAN, D. K. 1991. Survey of checkpoint and rollback-recovery techniques. Technical Report TR-91-CSE-17, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Univ. of Mass. BOWEN, N. S. AND PRADHAN, D. K. 1992. Vir tual checkpoints: Architecture and performance. IEEE Transactions on Computers 41, 5, 516– 525. BOWEN, N. S. AND PRADHAN, D. K. 1993. Processor and memory-based checkpoint and rollback recovery. IEEE Computer 26, 2, 22–32. CABILLIC, G., MULLER, G., AND PUAUT, I. 1995. The performance of consistent checkpointing in distributed shared memory systems. In Proceed ings, Fourteenth Symposium on Reliable Dis tributed Systems. CAMPOS, A. E. AND CASTILLO, M. A. 1996. Check pointing through garbage collection. Technical Report, Escuela de Ingenier´ıa Pontificia Univer sidad Catolica de Chile, Departamento de Cien- ´ cia de la Computacion. ´ CAO, J. 1991. On correctness of distributed rollback-recovery. In Proceedings of the 14th

Australia Computer Science Conference, 39. 31–39.10. CAO, J. 1992. Efficient synchronous checkpointing in distributed systems. In Proceedings of the 15th Australia Computer Science Conference, 165– 179. CAO, J. AND WANG, K. C. 1991. Efficient syn chronous checkpointing in distributed systems. Technical Report 91/6, James Cook University of North Queensland, Department of Computer Science. CAO, J. AND WANG, K. C. 1992. An abstract model of rollback-recovery control in distributed systems. Operating Systems Review, 62–76. CAO, G. AND SINGHAL, M. 1998. On the impossibil ity of min-process non-blocking checkpointing and an efficient checkpointing algorithm for mo bile computing systems. In Proceedings.1998 In ternational Conference on Parallel Processing, 37–44. CAO, G. AND SINGHAL, M. 1998. Low-cost check pointing with mutable checkpoints in mobile computing systems. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Distributed Com puting, 464–471. CARGILL, T. AND LOCANTHI, B. 1987. Cheap hard ware support for software debugging and pro filing. In Proceedings of the 2nd Symposium on Architectural Support for Programming Lan guages and Operating Systems, 82–83. CARTER, J. B., COX, A., DWARKADAS, S., ELNOZAHY, E. N., JOHNSON, D. B., KELEHER, P., RODRIGUES, S., YU, W., AND ZWAENEPOEL, W. 1993. Network multicomputing using recoverable distributed shared memory. In Proceedings of COMP CON’93. CASAS, J., CLARK, D., GALBIATI, P., AND KONURU, R. 1995. MIST: PVM with transparent migration and checkpointing. Technical Report, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science and Technology, Department of Computer Science. CHEN, R. AND NG, T. P. 1990. Building a fault tolerant system based on Mach. In Proceedings of the USENIX Mach Workshop, 157–168. CHEN, R. AND NG, T. P. 1992. Microkernel support for checkpointing. In Open Forum. CHIU, G.-M. AND YOUNG, C.-R. 1996. Efficient rollback-recovery technique in distributed com puting systems. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 7, 6. CHIUEH, T. 1992. Polar: A storage architecture for fast checkpointing. In Proceedings of the 1992 International Conference on Parallel and Dis tributed Systems, 251–258. CHIUEH, T.-C. AND DENG, P. 1996. Evaluation of checkpoint mechanisms for massively parallel machines. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-26, The Twenty-Sixth Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 370–379. CHOY, M., LEONG, H., AND WONG, M. H. 1995. On distributed object checkpointing and recovery.

Bibliography 3

In Proceedings of the 1995 ACM SIGACT SIGOPS Symposium on Principles of Dis tributed Computing (PODC). CHUNG, K.-S., KIM, K.-B., HWANG, C.-S., SHON, J. G., AND YU, H.-C. 1997. Hybrid checkpointing protocol based on selective sender-based mes sage logging. In Proceedings of the 1997 Inter national Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 788–793. CLEMATIS, A. 1994. Fault-tolerant programming for network based parallel computing. Micropro cessing and Microprogramming 40, 765–768. CLEMATIS, A., DODERO, G., AND GIANUZZI, V. 1992. Process checkpointing primitives for fault toler ance: Definitions and examples. Microprocessors and Microsystems 16, 1, 15–23. CUMMINGS, D. AND ALKALAJ, L. 1994. Check point/rollback in a distributed system using coarse-grained dataflow. In Digest of Pa pers, FTCS-24, The Twenty Fourth Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 424–433. DAMANI, O. P. AND GARG, V. K. 1996. How to recover efficiently and asynchronously when optimism fails. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Distributed Computing, 108– 115. DECONINCK, G. AND LAUWEREINS, R. 1997. User triggered checkpointing: system-independent and scalable application recovery. In Proceed ings Second IEEE Symposium on Computer and Communications, 418–423. DECONINCK, G., VOUNCKX, J., LAUWEREINS, R., AND PEPERSTRAETE, J. A. 1993. Survey of backward error recovery techniques for multicomputers based on checkpointing and rollback. In IASTED International Conference on Modeling and Sim ulation, 262–265. DECONINCK, G., VOUNCKX, J., LAUWEREINS, R., AND PEPERSTRAETE, J. 1998. Survey of backward error recovery techniques for multicomputers based on checkpointing and rollback. Interna tional Journal of Modeling and Simulation 18, 1, 66–71. DI, Z. 1987. Eliminating domino effect in back ward error recovery in distributed systems. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Computers and Applications, 243–248. DIETER, W. AND LUMPP JR., J. 1999. A user-level checkpointing library for POSIX threads pro grams. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-29, The Twenty Ninth Annual International Sym posium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 224– 227. DUDA, A. 1983. The effects of checkpointing on program execution time. Information Processing Letters 16, 221–229. ECUYER, P. L. AND MALEFANT, J. 1988. Computing optimal checkpointing strategies for rollback and recovery systems. IEEE Transactions on Computers 37, 491–496.

ELLENBERGER, E. L. 1995. Transparent process rollback-recovery: Some new techniques and a portable implementation. Technical Report, Texas A&M University, Department of Com puter Science. ELLIS, B. 1985. A stable storage package. In Pro ceedings of the USENIX Summer Technical Con ference, 209–212. ELNOZAHY, E. N. 1990. Efficient fault-tolerance support for interactive distributed applications. Technical Report TR90-120, Rice University, De partment of Computer Science. ELNOZAHY, E. N. 1994. Fault tolerance for clusters of workstations. In Banatre, M. ˆ AND Lee, P. eds. Hardware and software architectures for fault tolerance, Springer Verlag. ELNOZAHY, E. N. 1995. On the relevance of commu nication costs of rollback-recovery protocols. In Proceedings of the 1995 ACM SIGACT-SIGOPS Symposium on Principles of Distributed Com puting (PODC). ELNOZAHY, E. N. AND ZWAENEPOEL, W. 1992. Manetho, transparent rollback-recovery with low overhead, limited rollback and fast output commit. IEEE Transactions on Computers, Special Issue on Fault-Tolerant Computing 41, 5, 526–531. ELNOZAHY, E. N. AND ZWAENEPOEL, W. 1992. Repli cated distributed processes in Manetho. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-22, The Twenty Second Annual International Sympo sium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 18– 27. ELNOZAHY, E. N. AND ZWAENEPOEL, W. 1992. An in tegrated approach to fault tolerance. In Proceed ings of the Second Workshop on Management of Replicated Data, 82–85. FIDGE, C. J. 1988. Timestamps in message-passing systems that preserve the partial ordering. In Proceedings of the 11th Australian Computer Science Conference, 55–66. FISCHER, M. J., GRIFFETH, N. D., AND LYNCH, N. A. 1982. Global states of a distributed system. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering SE 8, 3, 198–202. FRAZIER, T. M. AND TAMIR, Y. 1989. Application transparent error-recovery techniques for mul ticomputers. In Proceedings of The Fourth Con ferences on Hypercubes, Concurrent computers, and Applications, 103–108. GAIT, J. 1990. A checkpointing page store for write once optical disk. IEEE Transactions on Com puters 39, 1, 2–9. GARG, S. AND WONG, K. F. 1993. Improving the speed of a distributed checkpointing algorithm. In Proceedings of the 6th International Con ference on Parallel and Distributed Computing Systems. GELENBE, E. 1979. On the optimum checkpoint ing interval. Journal of the ACM 2, 259– 270.

4 Elnozahy et al.

GELENBE, E. AND DEROCHETTE, D. 1978. Perfor mance of rollback-recovery systems under inter mittent failures. Communications of the ACM 21, 6, 493–499. GOLDING III, R. AND SINGHAL, M. 1993. Using log ging and asynchronous checkpointing to imple ment recoverable distributed shared memory. In Proceedings, Twelfth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 58–67. GREGORY, S. T. AND KNIGHT, J. C. 1989. On the pro vision of backward error recovery in production programming languages. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-19, The Nineteenth Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 506– 511. GROSELJ, B. 1993. Bounded and minimum global snapshots. IEEE Parallel and Distributed Tech nology 1, 4. HADZILACOS, V. 1982. An algorithm for minimizing rollback cost. In Proceedings of the ACM SIG MOD Symposium on Principles of Database Sys tems, 93–97. HELARY ´ , J. M. 1989. Observing global states of asynchronous distributed applications. Lecture Notes in Computer Science 392, 124–135. HELARY ´ , J. M., MOSTEFAOUI, A., AND RAYNAL, M. 1998. Communication-induced determination of consistent snapshots. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-28, The Twenty Eighth Annual Interna tional Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 208–217. HELARY ´ , J. M., MOSTEFAOUI, A., AND RAYNAL, M. 1999. Communication-induced determination of con sistent snapshots. IEEE Transactions on Paral lel and Distributed Systems 10, 9, 865–877. HEWITT, C. E. 1980. Checkpoint and recovery in ACTOR systems. Technical Report, MIT, Artifi cial Intelligence Laboratory. HIGAKI, H. AND TAKIZAWA, M. 1998. Checkpoint recovery protocol for reliable mobile systems. In Proceedings, Seventeenth Symposium on Re liable Distributed Systems, 93–99. HIGAKI, H., SHIMA, K., TACHIKAWA, T., AND TAKIZAWA, M. 1997. Checkpoint and rollback in asyn chronous distributed systems. In Proceedings IEEE INFOCOM ’97. Sixteenth Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and Commu nications Societies, 998–1005. ISRAEL, S. AND MORRIS, D. 1989. A non-intrusive checkpointing protocol. In Proceedings of the Phoenix Conference on Communications and Computers, 413–421. JALOTE, P. 1989. Fault-tolerant processes. Dis tributed Computing 3, 187–195. JANAKIRAMAN, G. AND TAMIR, Y. 1994. Coordinated checkpointing-rollback error recovery for dis tributed shared memory multicomputers. In Proceedings, Thirteenth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 42–51. JANSSENS, B. AND FUCHS, W. K. 1993. Relaxing consistency in recoverable distributed shared

memory. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-23, The Twenty Third Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 155–163. JANSSENS, B. AND FUCHS, W. K. 1994. Reducing interprocessor dependence in recoverable dis tributed shared memory. In Proceedings, Thir teenth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Sys tems, 34–41. JASPER, D. P. 1969. A discussion of checkpoint restart. Software Age. JEONG, K. AND SHASHA, D. 1994. Plinda 2.0: A trans actional/checkpoint approach to fault-tolerant Linda. In Proceedings, Thirteenth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 96–105. JOHNSON, D. B. 1993. Efficient transparent opti mistic rollback-recovery for distributed applica tion programs. In Proceedings, Twelfth Sympo sium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 86–95. JOHNSON, D. B. AND ZWAENEPOEL, W. 1988. Recovery in distributed systems using optimistic message logging and checkpointing. In Proceedings of the Sixth Annual ACM Symposium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC-88), 171–181. JOHNSON, D. B. AND ZWAENEPOEL, W. 1990. Output driven distributed optimistic message logging and checkpointing. Technical Report TR90-118, Rice University, Department of Computer Science. JOHNSON, D. B., AND ZWAENEPOEL, W. 1991. Trans parent optimistic rollback-recovery. Operating Systems Review, 99–102. KAASHOEK, M. F., MICHIELS, R., BAL, H. E., AND TANENBAUM, A. S. 1992. Transparent fault tolerance in parallel Orca programs. In Proceed ings of the Symposium on Experiences with Dis tributed and Multiprocessor Systems III, 297– 312. KAMBHALTA, S. AND WALPOLE, J. 1990. Recovery with limited replay: Fault-tolerant processes in Linda. In Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE Sym posium on Parallel and Distributed Processing, 715–718. KANT, K. 1978. A model for error recovery with global checkpointing. Information Sciences 30, 58–68. KANTHADAI, S. AND WELCH, J. L. 1996. Implementa tion of recoverable distributed shared memory by logging writes. In Proceedings of the 16th In ternational Conference on Distributed Comput ing Systems (ICDCS-16), 27–30. KERMARREK, A. M., CABILLIC, G., GEFFLAUT, A., MORIN, C., AND PUAUT, I. 1995. A recoverable distributed shared memory integrating coher ence and recoverability. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-25, The Twenty Fifth Annual Interna tional Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 289–298. KIM, K. H. 1982. Approaches to mechanization of the conversation scheme based on monitors. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering SE 8, 3, 189–197.

Bibliography 5

KIM, K. H. 1988. Programmer-transparent coordi nation of recovering concurrent processes: Phi losophy and rules for efficient implementation. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering SE 14, 6, 189–197. KIM, K. H. AND YOU, J. H. 1990. A highly decentral ized implementation model for the Programmer Transparent Coordination (PTC) scheme for cooperative recovery. In Digest of Papers, FTCS 20, The Twentieth Annual International Sympo sium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 282–289. KIM, J. L. AND PARK, T. 1993. An efficient proto col for checkpointing recovery in distributed sys tems. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Dis tributed Systems 4, 8, 955–960. KIM, K. H., YOU, J. H., AND ABOUELNAGA, A. 1986. A scheme for coordinated execution of inde pendently designed recoverable distributed pro cesses. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-16, The Sixteenth Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 130–135. KIM, Y., PLANK, J. S., AND DONGARRA, J. J. 1996. Fault-tolerant matrix operations using check sum and reverse computation. In Proceedings of 6th Symposium on the Frontiers of Massively Parallel Computation. KIM, Y., PLANK, J. S., AND DONGARRA, J. J. 1997. Fault-tolerant matrix operations for network of workstations using multiple checkpointing. In Proceedings of HPC Asia’97, High Performance Computing in the Information Superhighway, 460–465. KINGSBURY, B. A. AND KLINE, J. T. 1989. Job and pro cess recovery in a UNIX-based operating sys tem. In Usenix Association Winter Conference Proceedings, 355–364. KLAIBER, A. C. AND LEVY, H. M. 1993. Crash re covery for scientific applications. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems. KRISHNA, P., VAIDYA, N. T., AND PRADHAN, D. K. Recovery in distributed mobile environments. In Proceed ings of the IEEE Workshop on Advances in Par allel and Distributed Systems (Princeton, New Jersey), 83–88. KRISHNA, C. M., KANG, G., AND LEE, Y. 1984. Op timization criteria for checkpoint placement. Communications of the ACM 27, 10, 1008–1012. KRISHNA, P., VAIDYA, N. T., AND PRADHAN, D. K. 1994. Recovery in multicomputers with finite error detection latency. In Proceedings of the 23rd In ternational Conference on Parallel Processing. LAI, T. H. AND YANG, T. H. 1987. On distributed snapshots. Information Processing Letters 25, 153–158. LAMPORT, L. 1984. Using time instead of time out for fault-tolerant distributed systems. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems 6, 2, 254–280. LANDAU, C. R. 1992. The checkpoint mechanism in KeyKOS. In Proceedings of the 2nd International

Workshop on Object Orientation in Operating Systems. LEE, B., PARK, T., YEOM, H., AND CHO, Y. 1998. An efficient algorithm for causal message log ging. In Proceedings, Seventeenth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 19–25. LEON, J., FICHER, A. L., AND STEENKISTE, P. 1993. Fail-safe PVM: A portable package for dis tributed programming with transparent recovery. Technical Report CMU-CS-93-124, Carnegie Mellon University, School of Computer Science. LEONG, H. V. AND AGRAWAL, D. 1994. Using message semantics to reduce rollback in optimistic mes sage logging recovery schemes. In Proceedings of the 13th IEEE International Conference on Dis tributed Computing Systems (ICDCS-13), 227– 234. LEU, P.-J. AND BHARGAVA, B. 1988. Concurrent ro bust checkpointing and recovery in distributed systems. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Data Engineering, 154–163. LI, W.-J. AND TSAY, J.-J. 1997. Checkpointing message-passing interface (MPI) parallel pro grams. In Proceedings of the Pacific Rim Inter national Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Systems, 147–152. LI, K., NAUGHTON, J. F., AND PLANK, J. S. 1990. Real time concurrent checkpoint for parallel pro grams. In Proceedings of the 1990 Conference on the Principles and Practice of Parallel Program ming, 79–88. LI, K., NAUGHTON, J. F., AND PLANK, J. S. 1991. Checkpointing multicomputer applications. In Proceedings, Tenth Symposium on Reliable Dis tributed Systems, 1–10. LI, K., NAUGHTON, J. F., AND PLANK, J. S. 1992. An efficient checkpointing method for multicomput ers with wormhole routing. International Jour nal of Parallel Programming 20, 3, 159–180. LIN, L. AND AHAMAD, M. 1990. Checkpointing and rollback-recovery in distributed object based sys tems. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-20, The Twenti eth Annual International Symposium on Fault Tolerant Computing, 97–104. LIN, T.-H. AND SHIN, K. G. 1998. Damage assess ment for optimal rollback-recovery. IEEE Trans actions on Computers 47, 5, 603–613. LITZKOW, M. AND SOLOMON, M. 1992. Supporting checkpointing and process migration outside the UNIX kernel. In Usenix Winter 1992 Technical Conference, 283–290. LONG, J., FUCHS, W. K., AND ABRAHAM, J. A. 1990. Forward recovery using checkpointing in par allel systems. In Proceedings of the 19th In ternational Conference on Parallel Processing, 272–275. LONG, J., FUCHS, W. K., AND ABRAHAM, J. A. 1991. Implementing forward recovery using check pointing in distributed systems. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Dependable

6 Elnozahy et al.

Computing for Critical Applications (DCCA), 20–27. LONG, J., FUCHS, W. K., AND ABRAHAM, J. A. 1992. Compiler-assisted static checkpoint insertion. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-22, The Twenty Sec ond Annual International Symposium on Fault Tolerant Computing, 58–65. LOWRY, A., RUSSELL, J. R., AND GOLDBERG, A. P. 1991. Optimistic failure recovery for very large networks. In Proceedings, Tenth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 66–75. MANDELBERG, K. I. AND SUNDERAM, V. S. 1988. Process migration in UNIX networks. In Proceedings of the Usenix Winter Technical Con ference, 357–364. MANIVANNAN, D. AND SINGHAL, M. 1996. A low overhead recovery technique using synchronous checkpointing. In Proceedings of the 16th Inter national Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS-16), 100–107. MANIVANNAN, D., NETZER, R. H., AND SINGHAL, M. 1997. Finding consistent global checkpoints in a distributed computation. IEEE Transac tions on Parallel & Distributed Systems 8, 6, 623–627. MATTERN, F. 1988. Virtual time and global states of distributed systems. In Proceedings of the Work shop on Parallel and Distributed Algorithms, 215–226. MCDERMID, J. A. 1982. Checkpointing and error re covery in distributed systems. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, 271–282. MERLIN, P. M. AND RANDELL, B. 1978. State restora tion in distributed systems. In Digest of Pa pers, FTCS-8, The Eighth Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 129– 134. MITCHELL, J. R. AND GARG, V. K. 1998. A non blocking recovery algorithm for causal message logging. In Proceedings, Seventeenth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 3–9. MOSTEFAOUI, A. AND RAYNAL, M. 1996. Efficient message logging for uncoordinated checkpoint ing protocols. In Dependable Computing-EDCC 2, the Second European Dependable Computing Conference Proceedings, 353–364. MULLER, G., BANATRE ˆ , M., PEYROUZ, N., AND ROCHAT, B. 1996. Lessons from FTM: an experiment in design and implementation of a low-cost fault tolerant system. IEEE Transactions on Reliabil ity 45, 2, 332–340. NETT, E., KROGER, R., AND KAISER, J. 1986. Imple menting a general error recovery mechanism in a distributed operating system. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-16, The Sixteenth Annual Interna tional Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 124–129. NETZER, R. B. AND MILLER, B. P. 1992. Optimal trac ing and replay for debugging message-passing parallel programs. In Proceedings of Supercom puting’92, 502–511.

NETZER, R. B. AND XU, J. 1993. Adaptive mes sage logging for incremental program replay. IEEE Parallel and Distributed Technology 1, 4, 32–39. NETZER, R. B. AND WEAVER, M. H. 1994. Optimal tracing and incremental reexecution for Debug ging Long-Running Programs. In SIGPLAN ’94: Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), 313–325. NETZER, R. B. AND XU, J. 1997. Replaying dis tributed programs without message log ging. In Proceedings of the Sixth IEEE International Symposium on High Perfor mance Distributed Computing (HPDC), 137– 147. NEVES, N. AND FUCHS, W. K. 1996. Using time to improve the performance of coordinated check pointing. In Proceedings of the IEEE Interna tional Computer Performance and Dependability Symposium, IPDS’96, 282–291. NEVES, N. AND FUCHS, W. K. 1997. Adaptive recov ery for mobile environments. Communications of ACM 40, 1, 68–74. NEVES, N. AND FUCHS, W. K. 1998. RENEW: A tool for fast and efficient implementation of check point protocols. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-28, The Twenty Eighth Annual International Sym posium on Fault-Tolerant Computing. NEVES, N. AND FUCHS, W. K. 1998. Coordinated checkpointing without direct coordination. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Com puter Performance and Dependability Sympo sium (IPDS’98), 23–31. NEVES, N., CASTRO, M., AND GUEDES, P. 1994. A checkpoint protocol for an entry consis tent shared memory system. In Proceedings of the 1994 ACM SIGACT-SIGOPS Sympo sium on Principles of Distributed Computing (PODC). NICOLA, V. 1995. Checkpointing and the modeling of program execution time. In Lyu, M. ed. Soft ware Fault Tolerance. PARK, T. AND YEOM, H. Y. 2000. An asynchronous recovery scheme based on optimistic message logging for mobile computing systems. In Pro ceedings of the 20th International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS-20), 436–443. PETERSON, S. L. AND KEARNS, P. 1993. Rollback based on vector time. In Proceedings, Twelfth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 68–77. PETERSON, L. L., BUCHHOLZ, N. C., AND SCHLICHTING, R. D. 1989. Preserving and using context in formation in interprocess communication. ACM Transaction on Computing Systems 7, 3, 217– 246. PLANK, J. S. 1996. Improving the performance of coordinated checkpointers on networks of work stations using RAID techniques. In Proceedings, Fifteenth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 76–85.

Bibliography 7

PLANK, J. S. AND ELWASIF, W. R. 1998. Experimen tal assessment of workstation failures and their impact on checkpointing systems. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-28, The Twenty Eighth Annual In ternational Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Com puting, 48–57. PLANK, J. S., BECK, M., AND KINGSLEY, G. 1995. Compiler-assisted memory exclusion for fast checkpointing. IEEE Technical Committee on Operating Systems Newsletter, 62–67. PLANK, J. S., KIM, Y., AND DONGARRA, J. J. 1995. Algorithm-based diskless checkpointing for fault-tolerant matrix computations. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-25, The Twenty Fifth Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 351–360. PLANK, J. S., YOUNGBAE, K., AND DONGARA, J. J. 1997. Fault-tolerant matrix operations for networks of workstations using diskless checkpointing. Jour nal of Parallel & Distributed Computing 43, 2, 125–138. PLANK, J. S., LI, K., AND PUENING, M. A. 1998. Disk less checkpointing. IEEE Transactions on Paral lel & Distributed Systems 9, 10, 972–986. PLANK, J. S., CHEN, Y., LI, K., BECK, M., AND KINGS LEY, G. 1996. Memory exclusion: Optimizing the performance of checkpointing systems. Tech nical Report UT-CS-96-335, University of Ten nessee at Knoxville, Department of Computer Science. POWELL, M. AND PRESOTTO, D. 1993. Publishing: A reliable broadcast communication mechanism. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Symposium on Operating System Principles, 100–109. PRADHAN, D. K. AND VAIDYA, N. 1992. Roll-forward checkpointing scheme: Concurrent retry with non-dedicated spares. In Proceedings of the IEEE Workshop on Fault-Tolerant Parallel and Distributed Systems, 166–174. PRADHAN, D. K. AND VAIDYA, N. 1994. Roll-forward and rollback-recovery: Performance-reliability trade-off. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-24, The Twenty Fourth Annual International Sym posium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 186– 195. RAMAMURTHY, B., UPADHYAYA, S., AND IYER, R. K. 1997. An object-oriented testbed for the eval uation of checkpointing and recovery systems. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-27, The Twenty Sev enth Annual International Symposium on Fault Tolerant Computing, 194–203. RAMAMURTHY, B., UPADHYAYA, S., AND BHARGAVA, J. 1998. Design and analysis of a hardware assisted checkpointing and recovery scheme for distributed applications. In Proceedings, Sev enteenth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 84–90. RAMANATHAN, P. AND SHIN, K. G. 1988. Checkpoint ing and rollback-recovery in a distributed sys tem using common time base. In Proceedings, Seventh Symposium on Reliable Distributed Sys tems (SRDS-7), 13–21.

RAMANATHAN, P. AND SHIN, K. G. 1993. Use of com mon time base for checkpointing and rollback recovery in a distributed system. IEEE Trans actions on Software Engineering SE-19, 6, 571–583. RAMKUMAR, B. AND STRUMPEN, V. 1997. Portable checkpointing for heterogeneous architectures. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-22, The Twenty Sec ond Annual International Symposium on Fault Tolerant Computing, 58–67. RANGARAJAN, S., GARG, S., AND HUANG, Y. 1998. Checkpoints-on-demand with active replication. In Proceedings, Seventeenth Symposium on Re liable Distributed Systems, 75–83. RAO, S., ALVISI, L., AND VIN, H. 1999. Egida: An extensible toolkit for low-overhead fault tol erance. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-29, The Twenty Ninth Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing. RUSSINOVICH, M. AND COGSWELL, B. 1996. Replay for concurrent non-deterministic shared mem ory applications. In Proceedings of the 1996 ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Lan guage Design and Implementation, 258–266. RUSSINOVICH, M., SEGALL, Z., AND SIEWIOREK, D. P. 1993. Application transparent fault man agement in fault-tolerant Mach. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-23, The Twenty Third Annual In ternational Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Com puting, 10–19. SCHWARZ, R. AND MATTERN, F. 1994. Detecting causal relationships in distributed computa tions: in search of the Holy Grail. Distributed Computing 7, 149–174. SELIGMAN, E. AND BEGUELIN, A. 1994. High-level fault tolerance in distributed programs. Tech nical Report CMU-CS-94-223, Carnegie Mellon University, School of Computer Science. SHARMA, D. D. AND PRADHAN, D. K. 1994. An efficient coordinated checkpointing scheme for multicomputers. In Proceedings of the IEEE Workshop on Fault-Tolerant Parallel and Dis tributed Systems. SILVA, L. M. AND SILVA, J. G. 1992. Global check pointing for distributed programs. In Proceed ings, Eleventh Symposium on Reliable Dis tributed Systems, 155–162. SILVA, L. M. AND SILVA, J. G. 1994. Integrating a checkpointing and rollback-recovery algorithm with a causal order protocol. In Proceedings of the 12th Brazilian Symposium on Computer Net works, 523–540. SILVA, L. M. AND SILVA, J. G. 1994. Checkpointing pipeline applications. In Proceedings of the 1994 World Transputer Congress, 497–512. SILVA, L. M. AND SILVA, J. G. 1994. On the optimum recovery of distributed programs. In Proceedings of the 20th EUROMICRO Conference, 704–711. SILVA, L. M. AND SILVA, J. G. 1996. A checkpointing facility for a heterogeneous DSM system. In Pro ceedings of the 9th Conference on Parallel and Distributed Computing Systems, 554–559.

8 Elnozahy et al.

SILVA, L. M. AND SILVA, J. G. 1998. Avoiding check point contamination in parallel system. In Di gest of Papers, FTCS-28, The Twenty Eighth Annual International Symposium on Fault Tolerant Computing, 364–369. SILVA, L. M. AND SILVA, J. G. 1998. An experimen tal study about diskless checkpointing. In Pro ceedings of the 24th EUROMICRO Conference, 395–402. SILVA, L. M. AND SILVA, J. G. 1998. System-level versus user-defined checkpointing. In Proceed ings, Seventeenth Symposium on Reliable Dis tributed Systems, 68–74. SILVA, L. M., VEER, B., AND SILVA, J. G. 1994. Check pointing SPMD applications on transputer networks. In Proceedings of the Scalable High Performance Computing Conference, SHPCC94, 694–701. SILVA, L. M., SILVA, J. G., AND CHAPPLE, S. 1996. Portable transparent checkpointing for dis tributed shared memory. In Proceedings of the Fifth IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Distributed Computing, HPDC-5, 422–431. SILVA, L. M., TAVORA, V. N., AND SILVA, J. G. 1996. Mechanisms of file-checkpointing for UNIX ap plications. In Proceedings of the 14th IASTED Conference on Applied Informatics, 358–361. SILVA, L. M., SILVA, J. G., CHAPPLE, S., AND CLARKE, L. 1995. Portable checkpointing and recovery. In Proceedings of the 4th International Sympo sium on High-Performance Distributed Comput ing, HPDC-4, 188–195. SINHA, A., DAS, P. K., AND CHAUDHURI, A. 1992. Checkpointing and recovery in a pipeline of transputers. In Proceedings of Euromicro’92, 141–148. SLYE, J. H. 1996. Adding support for software in terrupts in log-based rollback-recovery proto cols. Master Thesis, Carnegie Mellon University, Department of Computer Science. SLYE, J. H. AND ELNOZAHY, E. N. 1996. Support ing nondeterministic execution in fault-tolerant systems. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-26, The Twenty-Sixth Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing. SMITH, J. M. AND IOANNIDIS, J. 1989. Implement ing remote fork() with checkpoint/restart. IEEE Technical Committee on Operating Systems Newsletter, 12–16. SOLIMAN, H. M. AND ELMAGHRABY, A. S. 1998. An an alytical model for hybrid checkpointing in time warp distributed simulation. IEEE Transactions on Parallel & Distributed Systems 9, 10, 947– 951. SPEZIALETTI, M. AND KEARNS, P. 1986. Efficient dis tributed snapshots. In Proceedings of the Inter national Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, 382–388. SSU, K.-F. AND FUCHS, W. K. 1998. PREACHES portable recovery and checkpointing in het

erogeneous systems. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-28, The Twenty Eighth Annual Interna tional Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 38–47. STAINOV, R. 1991. An asynchronous checkpoint ing service. Microprocessing and Microprogram ming 31, 117–120. STAKNIS, M. 1989. Sheaved memory: Architectural support for state saving and restoration in paged systems. In Proceedings of the 3rd Symposium on Architectural Support for Programming Lan guages and Operating Systems, 96–102. STELLNER, G. 1994. Consistent checkpoints of PVM applications. In Proceedings of the First European PVM User Group Meeting. STELLNER, G. 1996. CoCheck: Checkpointing and process migration for MPI. In Proceedings of the 10th International Parallel Processing Symposium. STROM, R. E., BACON, D. F., AND YEMINI, S. A. 1988. Volatile logging in n-fault-tolerant distributed systems. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-18, The Eighteenth Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 44–49. STROM, R. E., YEMINI, S. A., AND BACON, D. F. 1988. A recoverable object store. In Proceedings of the Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, II-215–II221. SURI, G., JANSSENS, B., AND FUCHS, W. K. 1995. Re duced overhead logging for rollback-recovery in distributed shared memory. In Digest of Pa pers, FTCS-25, The Twenty Fifth Annual Inter national Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Comput ing, 279–288. SURI, G., HUANG, Y., WANG, Y. M., FUCHS, W. K., AND KINTALA, C. 1995. An implementation and performance measurement of the progressive retry technique. In Proceedings of the IEEE In ternational Computer Performance and Depend ability Symposium, 41–48. TAM, V.-O. AND HSU, M. 1990. Fast recovery in dis tributed shared virtual memory systems. In Pro ceedings of the 10th International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, 38–45. TAMIR, Y. AND GAFNI, E. 1987. A software-based hardware fault tolerance scheme for multicom puters. In Proceedings of the International Con ference on Parallel Processing, 117–120. TAMIR, Y. AND FRAZIER, T. M. 1989. Application transparent process-level error recovery for mul ticomputers. In Proceedings of the Hawaii In ternational Conferences on System Sciences-22, 296–305. TAMIR, Y. AND FRAZIER, T. M. 1991. Error-recovery in multicomputers using asynchronous coordi nated checkpointing. Technical Report CSD 010066, University of California. TANAKA, K. AND TAKIZAWA, M. 1996. Distributed checkpointing based on influential messages. In Proceedings of the 1996 International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 440–447.

Bibliography 9

TANAKA, K., HIGAKI, H., AND TAKIZAWA, M. 1998. Object-based checkpoints in distributed sys tems. Computer Systems Science & Engineering 13, 3, 179–185. TAYLOR, D. J. AND WRIGHT, M. L. 1986. Backward error recovery in a UNIX environment. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-16, The Sixteenth Annual Inter national Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Comput ing, 118–123. THANAWASTIAN, S., PAMULA, R. S., AND VAROL, Y. L. 1986. Evaluation of global checkpoint rollback strategies for error recovery in concurrent pro cessing systems. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-16, The Sixteenth Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 246–251. TONG, Z., KAIN, R. Y., AND TSAI, W. T. 1989. A lower overhead checkpointing and rollback-recovery scheme for distributed systems. In Proceed ings, Eighth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 12–20. TSAI, J., KUO, S. Y., AND WANG, Y.-M. 1998. Theoret ical analysis for communication-induced check pointing protocols with rollback-dependency trackability. IEEE Transactions on Parallel & Distributed Systems 9, 10, 963–971. TSURUOKA, K., KANEKO, A., AND NISHIHARA, Y. 1981. Dynamic recovery schemes for distributed pro cesses. In Proceedings of the IEEE 2nd Symp. on Reliability in Distributed Software and Database Systems, 124–130. TULLMANN, P., LEPREAU, J., FORD, B., AND HIBLER, M. 1996. User-level checkpointing through ex portable kernel state. In Proceedings of the Fifth International Workshop on Object-Orientation in Operating Systems, 85–88. VAIDYA, N. H. 1993. Dynamic cluster-based recov ery: Pessimistic and optimistic schemes. Techni cal Report 93-027, Texas A&M University, De partment of Computer Science. VAIDYA, N. H. 1995. A case of two-level distributed recovery schemes. In Proceedings of the Inter national Conference on Measurement and Mod eling of Computer Systems (SIGMETRICS’95), 64–73. VAIDYA, N. H. 1996. On staggered checkpointing. In Proceedings of the Eighth IEEE Symposium on Parallel and Distributed Processing, 572–580. VENKATESAN, S. 1989. Message-optimal incremen tal snapshots. In Proceedings of the Interna tional Conference on Distributed Computing Systems, 53–60. VENKATESAN, S. 1997. Optimistic crash recovery without changing application messages. IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Sys tems 8, 3, 263–271. VENKATESH, K., RADAKRISHNAN, T., AND LI, H. L. 1987. Optimal checkpointing and local recording for domino-free rollback-recovery. Information Pro cessing Letters 25, 295–303. WANG, Y. M. 1993. Reducing message logging over head for log-based recovery. In Proceedings of the

IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, 1925–1928. WANG, Y. M. 1995. The maximum and minimum consistent global checkpoints and their applica tions. In Proceedings, Fourteenth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems. WANG, Y.-M. AND FUCHS, W. K. 1992. Optimistic message logging for independent checkpointing in message passing systems. In Proceedings, Eleventh Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 147–154. WANG, Y. M. AND FUCHS, K. 1992. Scheduling mes sage processing for reducing rollback propaga tion. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-22, The Twenty Second Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 204–211. WANG, Y. M. AND FUCHS, K. 1993. Lazy checkpoint coordination for bounding rollback propagation. In Proceedings, Twelfth Symposium on Reliable Distributed Systems, 78–85. WANG, Y. M. AND FUCHS, W. K. 1994. Optimal mes sage log reclamation for uncoordinated check pointing. In Proceedings of the IEEE Work shop on Fault-Tolerant Parallel and Distributed Systems. WANG, Y. M., HUANG, Y., AND FUCHS, W. K. 1993. Progressive retry for software error recovery in distributed systems. In Digest of Papers, FTCS 23, The Twenty Third Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing Sys tems, 138–144. WANG, Y. M., LOWRY, A., AND FUCHS, W. K. 1994. Consistent global checkpoints based on direct dependency tracking. Information Processing Letters 50, 4, 223–230. WANG, Y. M., HUANG, Y., AND KINTALA, C. 1997. Pro gressive retry for software failure recovery in message passing applications. IEEE Transac tions on Computers 46, 10, 1137–1141. WANG, Y. M., DAMANI, O. P., AND GARG, V. K. 1997. Distributed recovery with K-optimistic logging. In Proceedings of the 17th International Confer ence on Distributed Computing Systems, 60–67. WANG, Y. M., CHUNG, E., HUANG, Y., AND ELNOZAHY, E. N. 1997. Integrating checkpointing with transac tion processing. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-27, The Twenty Seventh Annual International Sym posium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 304–308. WANG, Y. M., HUANG, Y., VO, K. P., CHUNG, P. Y., AND KINTALA, C. 1995. Checkpointing and its ap plications. In Digest of Papers, FTCS-25, The Twenty Fifth Annual International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 22–31. WEI, X. AND JU, J. 1998. A consistent checkpointing algorithm with shorter freezing time. Operating Systems Reviews 32, 4, 70–76. WOJCIK, Z. AND WOJCIK, B. E. 1990. Fault-tolerant distributed computing using atomic send receive checkpoints. In Proceedings of the 2nd IEEE Symposium on Parallel and Distributed Process ing, 215–222.

10 Elnozahy et al.

WONG, K. F. AND FRANKLIN, M. 1996. Checkpoint ing in distributed computing systems. Jour nal of Parallel & Distributed Computing, 67– 75. WOOD, W. G. 1981. A decentralized recovery con trol protocol. In Digest of Papers, FTCS 11, The Eleventh Annual International Sym posium on Fault-Tolerant Computing, 159– 164. WOOD, W. G. 1995. Recovery control of communi cating processes in a distributed system. In Shri vastava, S. K. ed. Reliable Computing Systems, Springer Verlag. WU, K. L. AND FUCHS, W. K. 1990. Recoverable dis tributed shared virtual memory. IEEE Transac tions on Computers 39, 4, 460–469. WYNER, D. S. 1972. A technique for optimizing the performance of a checkpoint restart system. In Proceedings of the Canadian Computer Confer ence (Montreal), 201–212. XU, J. AND NETZER, R. H. B. 1993. Adaptive in dependent checkpointing for reducing rollback propagation. In Proceedings of the 5th IEEE

Symposium on Parallel and Distributed Process ing, 754–761. XU, J., NETZER, R. B., AND MACKEY, M. 1995. Sender based message logging for reducing rollback propagation. In Proceedings of the Seventh IEEE Symposium on Parallel and Distributed Process ing, 602–609. YOUNG, J. W. 1974. A first order approximation to the optimum checkpoint interval. Communica tions of the ACM 17, 9. ZAMBONELLI, F. 1998. Distributed checkpoint algo rithms to avoid rollback propagation. In Proceed ings of the 24th EUROMICRO Conference, 403– 410. ZIV, A. AND BRUCK, J. 1994. Efficient checkpointing over local area networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE Workshop on Fault-Tolerant Parallel and Distributed Systems, 30–35. ZIV, A. AND BRUCK, J. 1997. An on-line algorithm for checkpoint placement. IEEE Transactions on Computers 46, 9, 976–985. ZWEIACKER, M. 1997. Fault-tolerant CORBA using checkpointing and recovery. Comtec 75, 8, 20–25.

