# Design of a portable implementation of partitioned point‐to‐point communication primitives

Concurrency and Computation Practice and Experience. Published: 2023-02-22. 2 citations.

## Authors

- W. Pepper Marts (Sandia National Laboratories): h-index 4; 43 citations
- Andrew Worley (Tennessee Technological University): h-index 3; 36 citations
- Prema Soundarajan (University of Alabama at Birmingham): h-index 1; 2 citations
- Derek Schafer (University of Tennessee at Chattanooga): h-index 6; 107 citations
- Matthew G. F. Dosanjh (Queen's University): h-index 11; 331 citations
- Ryan E. Grant (Queen's University): h-index 21; 1,414 citations
- Purushotham Bangalore (University of Alabama): h-index 15; 870 citations
- Anthony Skjellum (University of Tennessee at Chattanooga): h-index 33; 6,580 citations; corresponding author
- Sheikh Ghafoor (Tennessee Technological University): h-index 16; 944 citations

## Topics

- Parallel Computing and Optimization Techniques
- Embedded Systems Design Techniques
- Interconnection Networks and Systems

## Funding

- National Science Foundation of Sri Lanka
- National Science Foundation
  - SHF: Medium: Collaborative Research: Next-Generation Message Passing for Parallel Programming: Resiliency, Time-to-Solution, Performance-Portability, Scalability, and QoS
  - SHF: Small: Collaborative Research: Coupling Computation and Communication in FPGA-Enhanced Clouds and Clusters
  - iPDC: Integrating Parallel and Distributed Computing in Introductory Programming
- U.S. Department of Energy
  - THE OVERALL MISSION OF THE CENTER FOR UNDERSTANDABLE, PERFORMANT EXASCALE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS (CUPECS) IS TO MEET THE CHALLENGES OF PROVIDING OPTIMIZED, PERFORMANCE-TRANSPARENT COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS FOR EMERGING NNSA EXASCALE APPLICATIONS.
- Sandia National Laboratories
- Office of Science

---

# Design of a portable implementation of partitioned point-to-point communication primitives

## Abstract

The Message Passing Interface (MPI) has been the dominant message passing solution for scientific computing for decades. MPI point-to-point communications are highly efficient mechanisms for process-to-process communication. However, MPI performance when processes utilize multiple threads is slowed by concurrency protections in the MPI library. MPI's current thread level interface imposes these overheads throughout the library when thread safety is needed. While much work has been done to reduce multithreading overheads in MPI, a solution is needed that reduces the number of messages exchanged in a threaded environment. Partitioned communication is included in the MPI 4.0 standard as an alternative that addresses the challenges of multithreaded communication in MPI today. Partitioned communication reduces overall message volume by creating a buffer-sharing mechanism between threads such that they can indicate when portions of a communication buffer are available to be sent. Separation of the control and data planes in MPI is enabled by allowing persistent initialization and single occurrence message buffer matching from the indication that the data is ready to be sent. This enables the usage of underlying hardware primitives like triggered operations, where commands (destination, size, etc.) can be set up prior to data buffer readiness and readiness triggered with a simple doorbell/counter later. This approach is useful for future development of MPI operations in environments where traditional networking commands can have performance challenges, like accelerators (GPUs, FPGAs). In this paper, we detail the design and implementation of a layered library (built on top of MPI-3.1) and an integrated Open MPI solution that supports the new, MPI-4.0 partitioned communication feature set. The library will enable applications to use currently released MPI implementations and older legacy libraries to provide partitioned communication support while also enabling further exploration of this new communication model in new applications and use cases. We will compare the designs of the library and native Open MPI support, provide performance results and comparisons between the two approaches, and lessons learned from the implementation of partitioned communication in both library and native forms. We find that the 1Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico, USA 2Tennessee Tech University, Cookeville, Tennessee, USA 3University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama, USA 4University of Tennessee at Chattanooga, Chattanooga, Tennessee, USA 5Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada 6University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, Alabama, USA

## INTRODUCTION

The Message Passing Interface (MPI) is the de facto standard for communicating between a large number of peer processes. The first MPI standard was released in 1994. 1 Thread support was subsequently added in MPI-2.0. 2 The inclusion of thread support and an increasing availability of multicore processors added both the possibility and necessity of hybrid programming with MPI (often denoted by MPI+X, where X=Pthreads, OpenMP, GPU acceleration kernels, etc). Supporting threaded programs well is complex and represents a major investment of effort for an MPI implementation. In light of this fact, the standard allows for different levels of thread reentrancy support, and does not require all implementations to provide all options. The thread support level indicates how much concurrent interaction is allowed between application threads and the MPI library. All thread support levels except the highest, MPI_THREAD_MULTIPLE, limit the interaction between threads and the MPI API, and thus each form a unique programming model. There are always locking and related overheads associated with supporting reentrancy in MPI.

There have been attempts over the years to streamline the hybrid programming model by integrating features into the implementations. The endpoints concept was one such attempt, 3, 4 which expanded the interprocess message addressing to include "thread" as a unique label, thus allow directed communication between threads controlled by different processes. Unfortunately, the proposed model has foundered in the MPI Forum's standardization process. While endpoints supported thread ranks (in groups and communicators) and thus addressability in point-to-point and collective communication, the proposal was not adopted as improvements could be adopted in the MPI implementations transparently 5 and because it was judged that the likely impacts on transport state and receive-queue lengths would be unacceptable with large-count multicore nodes in current and forthcoming scalable systems. 6, 7 e finepoints model, 8, 9 introduced by Grant et al., is another such model, now called partitioned point-to-point communication. This model was designed to address the queuing concerns of endpoints. Further, partitioned communication was designed such that it was possible to require only a portion of the library to function with full thread support, easing some of the optimization costs. 8 Partitioned communication is useful to study as it provides benefits beyond just performance. First, it is a good alternative to persistent operations when using partitioned counts of one as it reduces the number of times in an application loop that the operation must be matched from n to 1. Partitioned communication also provides the benefit of allowing overlapping of communication-computation as well as communication-communication. Communication-communication overlap occurs when MPI can send portions of a buffer before all of the buffer becomes available. These enhancements provide functionality that has much higher future performance optimization opportunities than traditional point-to-point as current nonoptimized implementations have similar performance to existing highly optimized point-to-point operations.

Our motivation for the present work was to prototype and make available a robust standalone MPI extension library that enables this partitioned communication, and that works with any compliant MPI-3.1 implementation (i.e., via a layered implementation). Since partitioned communication is new in MPI 4.0, 10, 11 the public implementations currently available are new as well, including the Open MPI one developed for this paper. We implemented partitioned communication in Open MPI, based in part on our layered library approach, which uses low-level internal calls to enable partitioned communication. It is available in the development branch of Open MPI and will be included in an upcoming official release. Also, the MPICH implementation of MPI now supports partitioned communication in a prerelease form. 12 though we mention drawbacks of a layered library below, there are also certain advantages to a library implementation that is independent of the underlying MPI implementation. First, the library approach means that partitioned communication can be provided in most or all MPI implementations immediately. In addition, the library can be used with older MPI versions, allowing for backwards compatibility for codes adapted to use partitioned communication. Finally, availability of a full, portable extension library will enable application adoption while providing a reference implementation for MPI-library-specific realizations of this functionality that are likely to be optimized over the next few months as MPI-4.0 becomes fully standardized and supported. 10 Lastly, we note that the layered library provides a vehicle for exploring extensions such as partitioned collective communication operations, due to be proposed in MPI-5.

## This paper makes the following contributions

• The first open-source portable library for partitioned communication.* • An MPI implementation agnostic platform for developing future partitioned communication concepts and interfaces.

• One of the first native MPI library implementations of partitioned communication.

• An fine-grained evaluation using MiniMod 13 to perform a performance evaluation using a variety of computational kernels and true fine-grained communication.

This paper extends the results of our prior paper. 14 Given these contributions, the audience for this paper are early adopters of partitioned communication and MPI library writers who seek to utilize a correct, exemplary baseline code for their efficient implementations, as well as researchers (such as the authors of this paper) who seek to extend partitioned communication in the near future with proof-of-concept prototyping.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 offers motivations and briefly describes the new partitioned communication APIs introduced in MPI 4.0. Section 3 presents a high-level view of how the partition communication functions are implemented in our library. This section also includes some commentary on the variations and optimizations for specific scenarios, while Section 3.4 describes the limitations and restrictions of the library. Section 4 discusses the results of an extended performance evaluation using MiniMod's fine-grained kernels. Section 5 discusses future work, including a discussion on GPU support. Lastly, Section 6 recapitulates our findings.

## PARTITIONED COMMUNICATION

Partitioned communication provides a thread-friendly interface to MPI without introducing crosscutting changes to groups, process numbering in groups and communications (loosely, ranks), and mux/demux of messages. Rather, it enables applications to associate multiple threads with buffer partitions on sender and/or receiver. Threads remain anonymous while buffer partitions become named subentities addressable locally on the sender/receiver. The message remains the end-to-end abstraction as in normal point-to-point communication.

In particular, partitioned point-to-point operations provide a thread-interface for message passing that supports pipelined and parallel message buffer filling and emptying, with the potential for overlapping buffer completion with transfer. This pipelining can have significant benefits for hybrid programming, such as MPI+OpenMP with fork-join assembly of messages in nonoverlapping partitions (send-side overlap of communication and computation) and/or partitioned completion of messages for overlapping receipt and work as data is received (receive-side overlap of communication and computation).

### Partitioned communication API

The status and progress of persistent communication operations in the MPI 3.1 standard are controlled through functions called on semi-permanent (reusable) request objects. Partitioned communications use a similar control methodology. The functions introduced as part of partitioned point-to-point communication API with function prototypes can be seen in Table 1 , and are described briefly below. In addition to the functions listed in the 4.0 API, there are two functions that have not yet been implemented that are proposed for inclusion in MPI 4.1, as well as minor behavior changes for when MPI_Start is called on a partitioned request.

MPI_Psend_init tells the library to start preparing a partitioned send operation. This function sets up the required plan for transfers and synchronization that will be needed for executing the operation later and is nonblocking (incomplete).

MPI_Precv_init operates analogously to MPI_Psend_init and shares the same nonblocking requirement and needs to synchronize, in general with its correspending MPI_Psend_init. This function prepares the receive-side to support a partitioned receive.

MPI_Pready is a local, nonblocking operation that tells the library that the partition with the supplied ID is ready to be sent. Even though the request must be started for a transfer to occur, individual partitions will not be sent until they are marked as ready with a MPI_Pready or its variants.

MPI_Pready_range enables the marking of a number of partitions in a request with an id between partition_low and partition_high inside a single function call while MPI_Pready_list marks those partitions with ids that are enumerated in the supplied array argument.

MPI_Parrived tests for the successful arrival of a particular partition on the receive side and if it is available for use. This function is nonblocking can return true before the entire partitioned send request is complete as long as the tested partition is ready at the receiver.

## Partitioned communication operations

The syntax and semantics for partitioned communications is based on persistent communication functions present in the MPI 3. and receiver), the library waits for various control functions shown in the previous section to be called and reacts accordingly. The functions and progress flow for a simple application using partitioned communication is shown in Figure 1 .

The communication begins with the initialization of the request objects. This is accomplished by calling the init function on each side of the request. Similar to other persistent MPI communication functions, the MPI_Psend_init and MPI_Precv_init functions take a pointer to a buffer, a source or destination, a communicator, a tag, and a MPI_Request handle. The application data buffer is logically divided into a number of equal-sized partitions given by the user. While the partitions on each side do not have to be the same, the total number of items on the receive size (type signature) must be greater than or equal to the number of items sent. Additionally the partitions on each side, do not prescribe how many messages are sent over the network. The supplied number of partitions defines how many external-facing partitions the buffer is split into on each side of the communication. The currently approved scenario using a set number of equal-sized partitions causes behavior similar to existing MPI collective operations in that elements in the buffer outside of the range of count × partition are not sent. For example, if a buffer is 50 integers long and the a send request is set up to send four partitions with 10 integers, then the last 10 integers will not be sent.

F I G U R E 1

After the init functions complete, the resulting object is then used to monitor and progress the request throughout its lifespan. Once the request has been created, MPI_Start activates the object; however, unlike a persistent request, no data is sent immediately. The MPI_Start function in this case only switches the request state to active. In order for the request to begin sending data, one or more partitions must be marked as ready to send. This is accomplished by calling MPI_Pready or a variant on that partition. Eventually, all partitions must be marked as ready for the send operation to complete. A MPI_Wait is also required to follow the marking of all partitions as ready, to ensure that the buffer is emptied, and that another partition send can be initiated.

The receive side has an optional function to inquire about the status of a particular partition, MPI_Parrived. The function returns whether or not the provided partition has arrived. However, a MPI_Wait or MPI_Test call must still be used to complete and finalize the receive-side request.

The optional MPI_Parrived call is not useful if there is only one receive-side partition, because the user must still call MPI_Wait or MPI_Test.

An inactive or completed request may be restarted multiple times; however the size, and buffer are fixed at the creation of the request.

MPI_Request_free must be called to free the resources associated with the request on each side (and only when they are inactive, a further difference from MPI persistent send and receive operations).

All the new functions used in the partitioned API are considered nonblocking; however, in order to ensure efficient operation between both sides of the communication some synchronization method is beneficial. The MPI_Pbuf_prepare and MPI_Pbuf_prepareall functions are being developed by some of the authors of this paper and others to fulfill this role. 15 For more details about the integration of MPI_Pbuf_prepare, see Section 5.

## ARCHITECTURAL OVERVIEW

The functions that were needed to implement MPI PCL are listed in Table 2 . There were two key goals for the design of the library: fully implement the approved API while achieving maximize portability. These goals led to the production of a layered form of the library that uses the standard C language binding of an MPI implementation. This allows the library to run on top of any MPI-3.1 compliant implementation. While a layered library supports portability, it limits the use of opaque objects, in particular: MPI_Request, MPI_Status, MPI_Datatype, and MPI_Comm. These limitations constrained the design and resulted in some key observations. We considered the various options for implementing the external library using initialization functions are nonblocking, our library spawns a short-lived control thread on each side (arrow 0) to exchange information about the number of partitions and datatypes (arrows 2 and 3). One control thread is spawned for each init function call and each thread performs a nonblocking send and a receive operation and waits for the operation to complete. Having a separate control thread allows the initialization functions on both the send-side and receive-side to return immediately without waiting for this information exchange. Once the control thread completes, the corresponding send and receive operations, the agreed-on number of internal requests are created.

User-level requests are inactive until MPI_Start is called on the given request. On the send side, the request is marked active (arrow 4a) and execution continues. On the receive side, if the control thread has completed, the library activates the partitions of the request (arrow 4b).

Otherwise, it sets a flag to activate the partitions after the control thread finishes the setup (arrow 5). The next stage is sending the partitions as they are marked ready (arrow 6a). If the send control thread has finished synchronization (arrows 3 and then 5), the underlying MPI implementation starts progressing the associated partitions (arrow 7). Otherwise, the MPI_Pready call marks the partition(s) as ready to be sent. When the send control thread finishes synchronizing, it will send any marked partitions (arrow 7a). On the receive side, the status of each internal request can be tested by MPI_Parrived (arrow 8b). The program can wait for the communication to finish by calling MPI_Wait on both sides. After all the internal partitions are successfully completed, the request marks that MPI_Wait can return.

The objects and resources can be released by calling MPI_Request_free. This deallocates the partitioned request object and the persistent internal requests, as well as terminating any existing control threads (arrow 10).

## MPIX_Request object

In order to fulfill the needs of the API, the library has to track the transmission status of each partition. The traditional MPI_Request object lacks the capacity to keep track of multiple partially completed requests. Since the library is designed to be portable, we had to create a framework that The MPIX_Request object contains two major sections: status metadata, and an internal array of normal MPI requests. The metadata includes the number and size of the partitions in the request as well as status information on the request progress. Additional information is used to map between the abstraction layers inside the request. The internal array of requests enable us to leverage the optimizations of the host implementation, and send each partition individually and track each partition's completion status.

As the MPIX_Request objects are replacing the MPI_Request objects, the various MPI functions that interact these objects had to be adapted to accept the MPIX_Request object. These re-implemented functions are listed in the first column of Table 1 . The augmented functions share the same prototype and behavior, except that all instances of a MPI_Request instead require a MPIX_Request. MPIX_Request objects are functionally the same as MPI_Request objects, but are not interchangeable (a side-effect of a the layered architecture).

Because of the layered structure of the library, we have limited access to the MPI_STATUS objects that are normally returned with these functions, and internally all status objects have been replaced with MPI_STATUS_IGNORE. This is further discussed in Section 3.4.

## Internal partitions

Since the library is designed on top of existing point-to-point communications and uses an internal array of requests, the library must comply to the standards involved in those protocols. This necessitates that both sides have the same number of internal requests, otherwise communication becomes unbalanced. A solution to this is to communicate the number of internal requests between the processes. While this can be avoided by having a preset number of partitions assigned by an MPI_Info key, such a choice limits the optimizations that can be done internally and places the optimization on the developer's shoulders (contrary to the spirit of the design goals of partitioned communication).

The initial communication is necessary and most implementations have several internal features that could be used to resolve the issue. Since the library is external, we do not have access to those features and are forced to use the user-level point-to-point communication functions. This forces the library to wait for the number of requests to be decided before allocating the array of internal requests.

Without the creating the internal requests, we cannot initiate any transfer. Hence, this causes a dependency on the completion of the internal partition negotiation. This conflicts with the approved API in the standard as both init functions are defined as nonblocking calls. Thus we needed a way to wait for the communication to complete without blocking the return of the initialization (and/or starting) call(s).

To resolve this issue, we spawn a separate control thread to perform the necessary communication and synchronization and to ensure nonblocking behavior for the initialization calls. The control thread waits on the completion of the send/receive operations (shown by arrows 2 and 3 in Figure 2 ), while the initialization functions can return immediately. The partition generation (arrow 5) must be completed before data transfer can occur. It is possible that the main thread will continue to the next MPI call and attempt to progress the operation before the control thread completes. The continued existence of the control thread signifies that the required setup operations are not complete.

As such, it is unsafe for the other threads to progress the library execution. Instead, the main thread adds the task to the control threads task queue. Once the control thread has completed the initialization tasks, it continues to process tasks queued by other threads. If the control thread has completed the initialization tasks before a call to MPI_Pready, then the library calls the start function on the corresponding partition.

TA B L E 3 Design cases for partitioning: Here M (resp, N) represents the number of partitions of the sender (resp, receiver). The parameter k is a positive integer multiple and X is an implementation-specific partition size.

## ARCHITECTURAL OVERVIEW
### Case Partitions Number of transfers

1 M N 1 (no init comm.) 2 M M M (no init comm.) 3 M N ≠ M M (init comm.) 4 M N ≠ M N (init comm.) 5 M = kN N kN (init comm., aggregation) 6 M N = kM kM (init comm., disaggregation) 7 M N ≠ M

X (aggregation and optimization)

## Optimization of specific cases

A key feature of the partitioned communication model is that it supports a different number of partitions on each side of the transfer. At each end of a send-receive pair, partitioning does not control the remote semantics, only the local transfer semantics. Some of these use cases are listed in Table 3 .

Here, the number of send-side and receive-side partitions are represented by M and N, respectively. The fourth column shows the internal number of messages generated for the given case. Cases 1 and 2 avoid additional communication during the initialization calls. Case 1 uses a fixed number of internal transfers while Case 2 assumes an equal number of partitions on both sides. Cases 3 and 4 require additional communication during the initialization call to negotiate the number of partitions. Cases 5 and 6 extend Cases 3 and 4 to include additional optimization by (dis)aggregating messages based on the number of partitions. Lastly, Case 7 exploits the underlying architecture to choose appropriate partition sizes and provide highly optimized communication.

These multiple cases result in partitioned communication having a large state space that makes general optimization difficult; however, optimization for specific cases is fairly straightforward. The MPI_Info object supplied to the init functions is designed to inform the underlying implementation which case is applicable to the request. This in turn enables the use of code optimized for that case. Our library currently supports cases 1 through 3, while support for the remaining cases remains under development.

Case 1: In this case, both sides have the different number of partitions, and the internal number of partitions is set to a predetermined number.

Since both sides of the request are assumed to receive the same MPI_Info object in the initialization function, this allows the initial communication to be safely ignored. However, in the future, there may be a small communication to confirm that both sides received the same MPI_Info key.

This case allows the library to skip the thread spawning and negotiation process and immediately start making the internal requests and progressing through the model. This makes the communication represented by arrows 0, 2, 3, 5, and 7a (as well as the control thread) shown in Figure 2 unnecessary.

Case 2: This case has the same number of partitions on each side as the number of internal partitions. This is similar to the previous case in that the initial communication can be safely ignored, but also allows a one-to-one mapping of partitions for each layer of abstraction. This greatly simplifies the abstraction process and removes the need for any internal remapping.

Case 3: This case allows different partitions on each side; however, the internal number of partitions is determined by the number of external partitions on the send side. For example, a transfer might have six send partitions and three receive partitions. Six internal partitions will be created on each side. Further, this case allows arrow 3 from Figure 2 to be ignored since the sender already has all the information needed for initialization.

## Limitations of the layered model

As this library current exists on top of existing MPI implementations, there are some limitations that are inherent to any layered libraries. Currently, because we cannot access the library's internals, we cannot properly return a fully formed MPI_Status object. Instead, our current implementation ignores any status objects passed to the function, and similarly uses MPI_STATUS_IGNORE as arguments to any function that requires a status object. In the future, we plan to provide our own status object to fulfill these needs.

The current implementation only supports built-in and contiguous datatypes. We intend to consider support for other user-defined datatypes as part of this effort. Also, our current implementation assumes that the datatypes on both the send-side and receive-side are identical (rather than type signatures). Support for distinct datatypes on sender and receiver is planned for future releases of the library. It is anticipated that applications that use partitioned communication will use multiple threads to achieve the best performance; that is, fill or empty buffer partitions concurrently.

In addition, our current library has an extra thread to achieve some of the progress needed to keep the partitioned communications moving. Our library depends on the support of MPI_THREAD_SERIALIZED (or greater) by the underlying MPI implementation and any application using our library must call MPI_Init_thread (with the aforementioned thread support level or greater) instead of MPI_Init.

Also, since this library is not fully integrated with an underlying MPI code base, we are limited in how we can optimize. However, we are still aiming to achieve minimal extra overhead (if any) so as to show users of potential performance benefits they might get from using partitioned communications. Because the library uses persistent point-to-point APIs, applications should at least experience the performance benefits of persistent point-to-point APIs, if they are optimized, and of pipelining of partitions, provided the underlying MPI has strong progress and the partitions are sufficiently long.

The use of persistent point-to-point APIs to implement partitioned communication APIs also limits the current implementation from performing additional performance optimizations such as message aggregation as the number of send and receive calls are decided during the initialization calls.

In closing it is worth noting that ROMIO 16 and LibNBC 17 both started as layered libraries, and have been integrated into multiple MPI implementations with acceptable performance and long-term support. As such, the layered library approach can have extended impact, even though initial versions emphasize functionality over performance.

## Integrated model

To address some of these limitations, we also designed and implemented partitioned communication over persistent communication integrated into Open MPI. There are a few modifications that were made to make the library work within Open MPI. Many of these were primarily software engineering issues, such as creating C and FORTRAN bindings for the new functions, implementing a new partitioned module in Open MPI's Module Component Architecture, and adding partitioned communication support to the request structures. However, there are a few concerns that required a different behavior from our implementation. The major differences in are illustrated in Figure 3 .

F I G U R E 3 Architectural overview of our open message passing interface integrated implementation.

## MiniMod background

MiniMod 13 is a modular application performance benchmark. The benchmark is designed for rapid testing of new communication interfaces by combining different modules at runtime. Particularly, MiniMod contains four types of modules;

1. Computational Kernels -Micro-benchmarks, Heat Diffusion, MiniFE The specific computational kernel designs and modifications are described at length in Reference 13. The kernels have not been modified

from their state in that publication. In brief, we remove the existing monolithic pack-and-send operation between a given process pair and break it into number of smaller sends, initialized from a threaded context at time of completion. The data communicated between a pair of processes is not changed with the switch to fine grained communication. However, the size of messages being sent is scaled directly by the number of partitions. If a base application sent a buffer of size X and the MiniMod computational kernel that extends it was designed to use a constant N p partitions, then the message size for each fine grained communication call for that pair is size

X N p

. The following is a pseudo-code example to illustrate the change.

Existing bulk synchronous application: The effort of modifying existing applications to use MPI partitioned communication depends greatly on the existing application and the desired granularity of packing and communication. Some examples (such as the one above) are much easier with their tight coupling of thread to buffer. It consists principally of changing the location of analogous calls. For the more complex example of miniFE it was an extensive and laborious process.

Because a given data element could potentially be sent to as many as seven recipients, it was not practical to tightly couple thread completion to the completion of any particular partition. Instead, in order to maximize early bird communication and send data as soon as possible, we must determine whether each element completed is a member of one or more communicated partitions, pack the data accordingly, and if that partition is completed call into the MPI library. This meant making communication calls from within the linear-algebra functions and implementing a thread safe means of tracking partition completion that was still performant enough to be added to the tight loop of a linear algebra solver.

## MiniMod additions

There are three major additions that were made to MiniMod to enable this comparison. The first and second are communication modules that allow the kernels to leverage our external library and internal implementation. The third is a new kernel module implementing the microbenchmark from the Grant et al.'s Finepoints paper 8 in MiniMod, allowing us to compare the perceived bandwidth of our two implementations.

## Experimental setup

This extended evaluation was conducted on two systems (Stria and Manzano) at Sandia National Laboratories. Stria is an ARM HPC system and is a development test bed for their Astra supercomputer. Using MiniMod we selected to focus solely on fine-grained communication and OpenMP. The rationale is that fine-grained communication is what partitioned communication aims to enable and OpenMP is commonly used as a threading library in scientific applications. Additional considerations were made in terms of level of granularity of "fine-grained" communication. In particular heat diffusion used a variable partition count with a fixed partition size of 128 doubles per partition and MiniFE used a variable partition size with a fixed total partition count of 256 partitions per rank.

## MiniMod results

In this section we present the results from our study of the two partitioned communication implementations, using three MiniMod kernels, namely, perceived bandwidth microbenchmark, heat diffusion application, and miniFE. Research data are not shared.

## ARCHITECTURAL OVERVIEW
### Microbenchmark

Our perceived bandwidth microbenchmark, partsend, 8 is a useful tool for the exploration of how thread completion timing effects network utilization. This benchmark simulates the behavior of a send-receive pair performing sends from a threaded context. This benchmark is novel in that it allows us to adjust two important variables. First is the time spent in computation per iteration. Second is a noise factor that adjusts the percentage difference between general thread completion time and a designated slow thread, thereby emulating OS noise and unbalanced workloads. A greater difference in completion time allows greater benefit from early bird communication. All data presented has 28 threads per socket, saturating the cores on both systems, and one partition per thread. Data presented is the perceived bandwidth. This metric is a measurement of the bandwidth that would be needed to accomplish the same send using a single threaded MPI_Send with the same iteration time. It is measured as the total data in bytes sent that iteration divided by the time span between the completion of the last thread and the completion of all communication calls. This value will often exceed the bandwidth achievable by the network, demonstrating a scenario where early bird communication has outperformed a bulk synchronous approach. This metric was chosen both to compare against the existing standard of MPI two-sided message matching, and also emulate experiments from Grant et al.'s publication. 8 Each data point is the mean and standard deviation from ten trials, each trial being run for 20 iterations.

The results of the microbenchmark experiments are shown in Figures 4 5 6 . Figure 4 shows the results for 0 ms computation time and 0% noise. This is useful for measuring overall maximum perceived bandwidth for a given buffer size. Figures 5 and 6 show how early bird communication can increase mean perceived bandwidth on Manzano by as much as 8.86x for MPIPCL and 9.21x for the integrated version and on Stria by as much as 6.97x for MPIPCL and 5.86x for the integrated version for 1024 KiB buffers and 10% noise. Neither MPIPCL or the integrated version have any significant difference in performance or behavior across our microbenchmark testing.

## Heat diffusion

Heat diffusion is a 5-point stencil kernel that aims to be representative of the communication and computation of two-dimensional stencil codes.

The kernel simulates the diffusion of heat through a heated steel surface. This kernel was built from the ground up for fine-grained communication and is not a conversion of an existing bulk synchronous application. Communicated data is packed and marked ready at time of completion. All jobs were run on nine nodes as to ensure a full 5-point stencil for the central process of the 3 × 3 process grid. In the results presented the square domain of each process, a two-dimensional grid of doubles, is scaled from an edge length of 2 7 to 2 15 by powers of two. Each data point is the mean and SD from five trials, each trial being run for 100 iterations.

## miniFE

We also ran a kernel based on miniFE which is a well-known finite elements, conjugate gradient proxy application for the physics package SIERRA. miniFE works on a three-dimensional (3D) grid, and computes using a 27-point stencil.

## ARCHITECTURAL OVERVIEW
### Discussion

As presented in this section there are a couple notable trade-offs in these two implementations. For our micro-benchmarks, we do not observe a significant difference, which is our expected baseline; both implementations use persistent point-to-point as the underlying data transfer mechanism. We start to see some overhead for the external library in heat diffusion, especially when the computation to communication ratio is low. This is likely due to some extra overheads in the calling structure of the external library when compared to the internal implementation; the external library must call the external MPI bindings which can add extra overhead with input checks, logging, etc. while the native Open MPI implementation can call directly into the internal functions. Interestingly, this pattern inverts when looking at the miniFE kernel, and we see overhead in the integrated implementation, that grows with process count. This is likely due to the structural changes required for the integrated implementation, namely the progress function. Particularly, the progress function has to track all active partitioned requests, and systematically test each underlying persistent request for completion, which can add delays as the number of partitioned requests and partitions per request grow. In contrast, the external implementation directly maps the completion calls (i.e., MPIX_Wait maps to MPI_Waitall) allowing it to leverage an optimized path and eliminating the need for extra completion checks. The Open MPI performance degradation should be addressed in future implementations, as MPI partitioned communication can be implemented using network primitives rather than other MPI calls.

## ENABLING NEXT GENERATION DEVELOPMENT

The library described here enables a convenient environment for the development and assessment of future extensions to MPI. We have identified three main categories of enhancements to future MPI standards that are promising avenues for future improvements and research: improving the layered library for greater performance at current functionality, expanding functionality to support more complex architectures, and speculative functionality not yet proposed or adopted in MPI-Next (versions beyond MPI-4.0). Note: both MPI-4.

## Enhanced structure and assertion handling

The optimizations for user assertions discussed at the end of Section 3 are currently implemented in separate versions of the library. Moving forward, these various cases are going to be integrated and communicable at runtime to the library by the MPI_Info object provided to the init functions.

From this, the library will call the relevant internal functions to execute the operation using code optimized for the particular assertion(s). Current planned assertions include side-driven (send or receive), and hard coded. The side-driven optimization allow for either side to drive the number of internal partitions based on the decision of the user. This simplifies the code so that the control thread is only needed on the nondriver side of the operation. Hard-coded mode allows both sides to complete the initialization process using a number of internal partitions chosen by the user. This allows the synchronization step to be omitted and removes the need to spawn a control thread.

## Other planned CPU extensions

In future work, we will address limitations discussed above in Section 3.4. Many of these limitations could be addressed with a deeper integration with one or more MPI implementations (for instance, ExaMPI 19 ). Such integration(s) are likely to reveal insights about partitioned communication because specific high-performance networks have different low-level capabilities and features. One such contribution found by the authors is the usefulness of adding an MPI_Info argument to the partitioned communication init functions. 20 1.0. University of Tennessee; 1994. Technical Report.

## GPU support

One of the primary architectures in exascale systems is multicore servers combined with accelerators, which are either GPUs or FPGAs currently.

Today, GPUs dominate this landscape. Supporting effective integration of partitioned communication with GPU offload is an important optimization for our library, even though layered on top of MPI implementations at present. And, partitioned point-to-point communication can be applied in general to high concurrency code execution environments, both highly threaded CPU code as well as massively threaded data parallel architectures like GPUs and programmable solutions like FPGAs. However, architectures such as GPUs are not well suited for traditional, high-performance MPI communication semantics, and even partitioned communication is not a perfect match for GPUs in its current form (MPI-4.0). Efforts are currently underway to introduce new partitioned communication functions in MPI-4.1 that help to optimize the performance of MPI when used in conjunction with GPUs. 15 Therefore, it is useful to have highly modifiable partitioned communication libraries, such as the one described in this paper, that can be used to prototype future functions and evaluate performance.

MPI_Pbuf_prepare is a prototype function in the library that is being used to explore the benefits of knowing the state of readiness of the receive-side buffer prior to calling MPI_Pready for the first time in a given point-to-point start/ready/wait iteration. 15, 21 Using the library, we are able to explore the benefits of such solutions by building a robust request-response exchange. In the future, this functionality will be integrated into MPI_Pbuf_prepare (currently a NOP, i.e., no operation). Knowing that the remote buffer is ready to receive data can allow us to reduce the code path complexity significantly. For example, if the remote buffer is always ready, there is no need to keep state on the buffer readiness, nor is there any reason to have to hold the partition locally (at sender or receiver) to ensure buffer readiness.

There are legitimate reasons as to why an implementation may want to aggregate multiple partitions to send them efficiently on a network, but for GPUs this may not be advantageous. In the case of a GPU, we want a simple code path for best performance, with as few branches and pointer-chasing lookups as possible. This is because of the data-centric designs of GPUs, where the processing pipeline has data delivered for threads as they need it. If the data is speculative (branch) or the data is a pointer to another memory location, then this slows the entire thread group in the GPU pipeline.

GPUs are not ill-suited for creating commands and sending them to the network interface card (NIC) either. Assembling data in an I/O Vector (iovec) fashion and performing multiple pointer chasing lookups is not ideal in performance terms for a GPU. In addition, all of the information needed to insert a new entry into the command queue of the NIC is needed at the GPU, while much of this information resides in data structures on the CPU, or in the operating system memory space, which is expensive and difficult to access from the GPU. GPUs are, however, well suited for lightweight doorbell notifications since there is limited data needed to ring a doorbell on another PCIe attached device. Therefore, a solution that allows remote buffer readiness to always be guaranteed and allows a CPU to fill a NIC's command queue with doorbell-triggered send/write operations before launching a GPU kernel provides the best performance throughout to the system. The CPU no longer has to wait for the GPU to complete its kernel 15320634, 2023, 20, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cpe.7655 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [22/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions ( https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions ) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License to send data, and the GPU can trigger transfer operations without requiring branch operations or creating NIC commands. Each component does the jobs for which it is best suited while still allowing data transfers to occur as soon as they are ready.

## Partitioned collective communication

The merger of persistent collective operations 10 and partitioned concepts from partitioned point-to-point operations yields the extended operational set of persistent, partitioned collective operations. Partitioning extends logically to many of the collective operations defined by MPI, both in intra-and inter-communicator modes, such as Bcast, Allreduce, and Neighbor_alltoall [v|w]. We plan to prototype the syntax and semantics, explore fully nonblocking (local) init functions, and study the utility of both send-and receive-side partitioning for all the operations (or lack thereof).

## CONCLUSIONS

The focus of this paper was the design and prototyping of a layered library that adds MPI-4 partitioned communication API to an MPI-3.1 library, as well as a native MPI-4 partitioned communication implementation. Initial experience in designing these implementations along with preliminary performance results were presented. The partitioned functionality is complete and baseline performance is acceptable, although actual performance gains were not the key goal at this time. MPI applications can now be modified to use partitioned point-to-point communication while production MPI implementations optimize the performance of these new features with and without accelerator offload.

Our partitioned communication library provides an effective framework for future explorations of the partitioned communication interface, which was designed to be able to support high concurrency for both traditional CPUs as well as accelerator devices (GPUs, FPGAs). As such, the interface will have further enhancements proposed for future MPI standard versions to optimize communication performance for accelerator architectures. This partitioned communication library offers a solid foundation to build such prototypes, then evaluate their performance and programmability improvements.

the existing MPI point-to-point and one-sided APIs. Since the init calls are local, we cannot use blocking or one-sided APIs to implement them, leaving us with nonblocking and persistent point-to-point APIs. We decided to use the persistent point-to-point APIs in this library since they have a reasonable semantic match.The operation of the library follows the basic protocol shown in Figure2. The partition communication operation begins with the initialization of the MPI_Request object (arrow 1). After the object is created, the library then needs to agree on the number of internal partitions. Since the TA B L E 2 List of provided functions Architectural overview of our portable library -Green arrows represent control variable signals and blue arrows represent inter-process communication.

Communication Interfaces -MPI, MPI RMA, OpenSHMEM 3. Communication Granularity -Bulk Synchronous, Fine Grained 4. Threading Interfaces -OpenMP, Pthreads This allows for rapid development of a wide suite of tests by adding a single implementation of the new communication interface. For example by implementing a Partitioned Communication module we have 12 different benchmarks through combinations of different kernel, granularity, and threading modules.

I G U R E 4 Comparison of microbenchmark perceived bandwidth (0 ms Comp, 0% Noise). (A) Manzano; (B) Stria. F I G U R E 5 Comparison of microbenchmark perceived bandwidth (100 ms Comp, 4% Noise). (A) Manzano; (B) Stria. F I G U R E 6 Comparison of microbenchmark perceived bandwidth (100 ms Comp, 10% Noise). (A) Manzano; (B) Stria.F I G U R E 7 Comparison of heat diffusion total run time. (A) Manzano; (B) Stria. F I G U R E 8 Comparison of heat diffusion communication wait time. (A) Manzano; (B) Stria.The results of the heat diffusion experiments are shown in Figures7A and 8Afor Manzano and in Figures7B and 8Bfor Stria. They show similar results for both systems. There is a small run time difference between MPIPCL and the integrated version. On both Manzano and Stria this difference is less than 1% for runs with edge length 2 12 or larger and approximately (±30ms) 280ms and 150ms for all runs with edge length 2 11 or smaller on Manzano and Stria, respectively. This nearly constant overhead is due to the difference in initialization coupled with the minuscule difference in communication wait time.

Comparison of miniFE total run time. The results of the miniFE experiments are shown in Figure 9A for Manzano and Figure 9B for Stria. In these tests MPIPCL consistently outperforms the integrated version. A full communication pattern for a 27-point stencil does not emerge until the 64 process runs. For this reason we expected to see a small increase in run time as we increase process count to this threshold. Past this point one would no longer expect to see meaningful change in performance between MPIPCL and the integrated version. Instead we see that at the integrated version does not scale as well as MPIPCL on both machines. Both implementations use the same MPI collective calls, and there is no additional communication per node once the full stencil is reached.

15320634, 2023, 20, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cpe.7655 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [22/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Approved MPI 4.0 functions-C language binding TA B L E 1 MPI 4.0 and 4.1 partitioned point-to-point communication application programmer interface (API) 10 MPI_Psend_init(void *buf, int partitions, MPI_Count count, MPI_Datatype datatype, int dest, int tag, MPI_Comm comm, MPI_Info info, MPI_Request *request) MPI_Precv_init(void *buf, int partitions, MPI_Count count, MPI_Datatype datatype, int source, int tag, MPI_Comm comm, MPI_Info info, MPI_Request *request) MPI_Pready(int partition, MPI_Request *request) MPI_Pready_range(int partition_low, int partition_high, MPI_Request *request) MPI_Pready_list(int length, int array_of_partitions[], MPI_Request *request) MPI_Parrived(MPI_Request *request, int partition, int *flag) Proposed MPI 4.1 functions MPI_Pbuf_prepare(MPI_Request request) MPI_Pbuf_prepareall(int count, MPI_Request requests[])

15320634, 2023, 20, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cpe.7655by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [22/01/2026].See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions)on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons Licensewould allow us to observe and control the transmission of each partition. For this purpose, we created a new MPIX_Request object. The basic layout of the object is shown in Listing 1. typedef struct _mpix_request { int state; int size; int side; int sendparts; int recvparts; int readycount; MPI_Request *request; ... // Other thread information } MPIX_Request; Listing 1: The MPIX Request object

Each node houses two 28 core Cavium ThunderX2 CN9975 CPUs (dual-socket) running at 2 GHz and has 128 GB of RAM. The intersocket communication is handled by a second-generation Cavium Coherent Processor Interconnect which runs at 600 Gbps. Extra-node communication is handled by Mellanox Connect-X5 InfiniBand network adapter which runs at 100 Gbps over a Fat Tree topology. Stria runs the Advanced Trilab Software Environment (ATSE) software stack 18 built on Red Hat 7 for arch64. Manzano is an x86-64 HPC system and a CTS-1 commodity cluster. Each node houses two 28 core Intel Cascade Lake 8268 CPUs (dual-socket) running at 2.9 GHz and has 192 GB of RAM. Extra-node communication is handled by an Intel Omnipath InfiniBand network. Manzano runs the Tri-lab Operating System Software (TOSS3) software stack based on Red Hat 7. All runs used a development branch of OMPI † . MPIPCL uses the version 4 codebase used in Reference 14.

15320634, 2023, 20, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cpe.7655 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [22/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

The miniFE based kernel is modified to pack and send data at time of completion by leveraging MiniMod's fine-grained communication and threading support. Jobs were run on allocations ranging from 2 up to 64 nodes, each with one process per socket. Results presented are from weak scaling in which the 3D global domain is scaled to ensure a constant local domain sized of 128 3 elements per process. Each data point is the mean and SD from five trials, each with 200 iterations. 15320634, 2023, 20, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cpe.7655 by Readcube (Labtiva Inc.), Wiley Online Library on [22/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

we expect to undertake, together with other collaborators. Additionally, we expect to use the library to create a fully optimized, implementation-integrated version of partitioned communication in the near future (such as a more advanced version of the Open MPI work described in this paper).

## CONCLUSIONS
### References

MPI: A Message-Passing Interface Standard Version 1.0 1994 MPI Forum ; University of Tennessee Technical Report MPI Forum. MPI: A Message-Passing Interface Standard. Version 1.0. University of Tennessee; 1994. Technical Report.

MPI: A Message-Passing Interface Standard Version 2.0 1997 MPI Forum ; University of Tennessee Technical report MPI Forum. MPI: A Message-Passing Interface Standard. Version 2.0. University of Tennessee; 1997. Technical report.

Enabling efficient multithreaded MPI communication through a library-based implementation of MPI endpoints S Sridharan J Dinan D D Kalamkar info:doi/10.1109/SC.2014.45 International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis SC; New Orleans, LA 2014. 2014 Paper presented at Sridharan S, Dinan J, Kalamkar DD. Enabling efficient multithreaded MPI communication through a library-based implementation of MPI endpoints. Paper presented at: International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, SC 2014; 2014; New Orleans, LA:487-498. doi: 10.1109/SC.2014.

Enabling communication concurrency through flexible MPI endpoints J Dinan R E Grant P Balaji Int J High Perform Comput Appl 28 4 2014 Dinan J, Grant RE, Balaji P, et al. Enabling communication concurrency through flexible MPI endpoints. Int J High Perform Comput Appl. 2014;28(4):390-405.

R Zambre A Chandramowlishwaran P Balaji arXiv:2005.00263.2020 How I learned to stop worrying about user-visible endpoints and love MPI arXiv preprint Zambre R, Chandramowlishwaran A, Balaji P. How I learned to stop worrying about user-visible endpoints and love MPI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00263. 2020.

Tail queues: a multi-threaded matching architecture Mgf Dosanjh R E Grant W Schonbein P G Bridges info:doi/10.1002/cpe.5158 Concurr Comput Pract Exp 32 3 2020 Dosanjh MGF, Grant RE, Schonbein W, Bridges PG. Tail queues: a multi-threaded matching architecture. Concurr Comput Pract Exp. 2020;32(3). doi:10. 1002/cpe.5158 5. Zambre R, Chandramowlishwaran A, Balaji P. How I learned to stop worrying about user-visible endpoints and love MPI. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00263.

Measuring multithreaded message matching misery W Schonbein Mgf Dosanjh R E Grant P G Bridges Euro-Par 2018: Parallel Processing -24th International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Computing Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science M Aldinucci L Padovani M Torquati Turin, Italy Springer August 27-31, 2018. 2018 11014 Schonbein W, Dosanjh MGF, Grant RE, Bridges PG. Measuring multithreaded message matching misery. In: Aldinucci M, Padovani L, Torquati M, eds. Euro-Par 2018: Parallel Processing -24th International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Computing, Turin, Italy, August 27-31, 2018, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol 11014. Springer; 2018:480-491.

Finepoints: partitioned multithreaded MPI communication R E Grant Mgf Dosanjh M J Levenhagen R Brightwell A Skjellum High Performance Computing -34th International Conference, ISC High Performance 2019 Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science M Weiland G Juckeland C Trinitis P Sadayappan Frankfurt/Main, Germany Springer June 16-20, 2019. 2019 11501 Grant RE, Dosanjh MGF, Levenhagen MJ, Brightwell R, Skjellum A. Finepoints: partitioned multithreaded MPI communication. In: Weiland M, Jucke- land G, Trinitis C, Sadayappan P, eds. High Performance Computing -34th International Conference, ISC High Performance 2019, Frankfurt/Main, Germany, June 16-20, 2019, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol 11501. Springer; 2019:330-350.

Lightweight Threading with MPI Using Persistent Communications Semantics R Grant A Skjellum P V Bangalore SAND2015-10084C 2015 SNL-NM Sandia National Lab Technical report Grant R, Skjellum A, Bangalore PV. Lightweight Threading with MPI Using Persistent Communications Semantics. Sandia National Lab.(SNL-NM); 2015. Technical report SAND2015-10084C.

MPI: A Message-Passing Interface Standard 2020. 2020 MPI Forum ; University of Tennessee Technical report Draft Specification. Note: This is a MPI-4 Draft Specification MPI Forum. MPI: A Message-Passing Interface Standard. 2020 Draft Specification. University of Tennessee; 2020. Technical report. Note: This is a MPI-4 Draft Specification.

Partitioned point-to-point communication R Grant 2019. August 13, 2020 Grant R. Partitioned point-to-point communication. 2019. Accessed August 13, 2020. https://github.com/mpi-forum/mpi-issues/issues/136.

MPICH version 4.0a1 release 2021. April 22, 2021 github. MPICH version 4.0a1 release. 2021. Accessed April 22, 2021. https://github.com/pmodels/mpich/releases/tag/v4.0a1.

MiniMod: a modular miniapplication benchmarking framework for HPC W P Marts Mgf Dosanjh S Levy W Schonbein R E Grant P G Bridges info:doi/10.1109/Cluster48925.2021.00028 IEEE International Conference on Cluster Computing CLUSTER; Portland, OR 2021. 2021 Paper presented at Marts WP, Dosanjh MGF, Levy S, Schonbein W, Grant RE, Bridges PG. MiniMod: a modular miniapplication benchmarking framework for HPC. Paper presented at: IEEE International Conference on Cluster Computing, CLUSTER 2021; 2021; Portland, OR:12-22. doi: 10.1109/Cluster48925.2021. 00028 6. Dosanjh MGF, Grant RE, Schonbein W, Bridges PG. Tail queues: a multi-threaded matching architecture. Concurr Comput Pract Exp. 2020;32(3). doi:10.

Design of a portable implementation of partitioned point-to-point communication primitives A Worley P Soundararajan D Schafer info:doi/10.1145/3458744.3474046 ICPP Workshops 2021: 50th International Conference on Parallel Processing, Virtual Event Lemont (near Chicago), IL 2021 35 Paper presented at Worley A, Soundararajan P, Schafer D, et al. Design of a portable implementation of partitioned point-to-point communication primitives. Paper pre- sented at: ICPP Workshops 2021: 50th International Conference on Parallel Processing, Virtual Event. 2021; Lemont (near Chicago), IL:35:1-35:11. doi: 10.1145/3458744.3474046

Synchronization on partitioned communication for accelerator optimization R Grant 2020. August 13, 2020 Grant R. Synchronization on partitioned communication for accelerator optimization. 2020. Accessed August 13, 2020. https://github.com/mpi-forum/ mpi-issues/issues/302 1002/cpe.5158

Users Guide for ROMIO: A High-Performance, Portable MPI-IO Implementation R Thakur E Lusk W Gropp info:doi/10.2172/564273 1997 OSTI Technical report Thakur R, Lusk E, Gropp W. Users Guide for ROMIO: A High-Performance, Portable MPI-IO Implementation. OSTI; 1997. Technical report ANL/MCS-TM-234. doi: 10.2172/564273 7. Schonbein W, Dosanjh MGF, Grant RE, Bridges PG. Measuring multithreaded message matching misery. In: Aldinucci M, Padovani L, Torquati M, eds.

Design, Implementation, and Usage of LibNBC T Hoefler A Lumsdaine TR637 2006 8 Open Systems Lab, Indiana University Technical report Hoefler T, Lumsdaine A. Design, Implementation, and Usage of LibNBC. Open Systems Lab, Indiana University; 2006:8. Technical report TR637.

FY18 L2 Milestone# 8759 Report: Vanguard Astra and ATSE an ARM-Based Advanced Architecture Prototype System and Software Environment J H Laros K Pedretti S D Hammond 2018 Albuquerque, NM Sandia National Lab (SNL-NM) Technical report Laros JH, Pedretti K, Hammond SD, et al. FY18 L2 Milestone# 8759 Report: Vanguard Astra and ATSE an ARM-Based Advanced Architecture Prototype System and Software Environment. Sandia National Lab (SNL-NM), Albuquerque, NM; 2018. Technical report.

ExaMPI: a modern design and implementation to accelerate message passing interface innovation A Skjellum M Rüfenacht N Sultana D Schafer I Laguna K Mohror High Performance Computing -6th Latin American Conference, CARLA 2019 Communications in Computer and Information Science J L Crespo-Mariño E Meneses-Rojas Turrialba, Costa Rica Springer September 25-27, 2019. 2019 1087 Revised Selected Papers Skjellum A, Rüfenacht M, Sultana N, Schafer D, Laguna I, Mohror K. ExaMPI: a modern design and implementation to accelerate message passing interface innovation. In: Crespo-Mariño JL, Meneses-Rojas E, eds. High Performance Computing -6th Latin American Conference, CARLA 2019, Turrialba, Costa Rica, September 25-27, 2019, Revised Selected Papers. Communications in Computer and Information Science. Vol 1087. Springer; 2019:153-169.

Add MPI_INFO argument to PSEND_INIT/PRECV_INIT calls for partitioned communication chapter A Skjellum R E Grant 2020. December 8, 2020 Skjellum A, Grant RE. Add MPI_INFO argument to PSEND_INIT/PRECV_INIT calls for partitioned communication chapter. 2020. Accessed December 8, 2020. https://github.com/mpi-forum/mpi-issues/issues/308 8. Grant RE, Dosanjh MGF, Levenhagen MJ, Brightwell R, Skjellum A. Finepoints: partitioned multithreaded MPI communication. In: Weiland M, Jucke land G, Trinitis C, Sadayappan P, eds.High Performance Computing - 34th International Conference, ISC High Performance 2019, Frankfurt/Main, Germany, June 16-20, 2019, Proceedings. Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol 11501. Springer; 2019:330-350.

MPI Partitioned Communication R E Grant SAND2020-10163C 2020 Sandia National Laboratories Technical report includes MPI_Psync Grant RE. MPI Partitioned Communication. Sandia National Laboratories. 2020. Technical report SAND2020-10163C, includes MPI_Psync.