MPIX Stream: An Explicit Solution to Hybrid
MPI+X Programming
Hui Zhou
Argonne National Laboratory
Lemont, IL 60439, USA
Ken Raffenetti
Argonne National Laboratory
Lemont, IL 60439, USA
Yanfei Guo
Argonne National Laboratory
Lemont, IL 60439, USA
Rajeev Thakur
Argonne National Laboratory
Lemont, IL 60439, USA
ABSTRACT
The hybrid MPI+X programming paradigm, where X refers to
threads or GPUs, has gained prominence in the high-performance
computing arena. This corresponds to a trend of system architectures growing more heterogeneous. The current MPI standard only
specifies the compatibility levels between MPI and threading runtimes. No MPI concept or interface exists for applications to pass
thread context or GPU stream context to MPI implementations explicitly. This lack has made performance optimization complicated
in some cases and impossible in other cases. We propose a new
concept in MPI, called MPIX stream, to represent the general serial execution context that exists in X runtimes. MPIX streams can
be directly mapped to threads or GPU execution streams. Passing
thread context into MPI allows implementations to precisely map
the execution contexts to network endpoints. Passing GPU execution context into MPI allows implementations to directly operate
on GPU streams, lowering the CPU/GPU synchronization cost.
KEYWORDS
MPI+X, MPI+Threads, MPI+GPUs, Network Endpoints, MPIX Stream,
GPU Stream
ACM Reference Format:
Hui Zhou, Ken Raffenetti, Yanfei Guo, and Rajeev Thakur. 2022. MPIX
Stream: An Explicit Solution to Hybrid MPI+X Programming. In Proceedings
of . ACM, New York, NY, USA, 10 pages.
1 INTRODUCTION
Modern high-performance computing applications are more and
more dependent on additional runtimes besides MPI to manage
the increased number of cores per node and myriad limited onnode resources such as shared memory, network interfaces, and
computational accelerators. Increasingly, applications are being
deployed by using a hybrid MPI+X model, where X refers to a
threading runtime such as OpenMP or an accelerator runtime such
as CUDA.
The first step in MPI+X was to make MPI compatible with a
threading runtime. Since 1997, MPI has introduced four thread
Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM acknowledges that this contribution was
authored or co-authored by an employee, contractor or affiliate of the United States
government. As such, the Government retains a nonexclusive, royalty-free right to
publish or reproduce this article, or to allow others to do so, for Government purposes
only.
,
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
compatibility levels: MPI_THREAD_SINGLE, MPI_THREAD_FUNNELED,
MPI_THREAD_SERIALIZED, and MPI_THREAD_MULTIPLE. When the
appropriate thread level is chosen, threaded applications can work
correctly with MPI without MPI specifically acknowledging the
runtime. MPI implementations also can be made GPU aware. Recent
MPICH [5], MVAPICH [13], and Open MPI [12] releases are able to
detect GPU buffers without hints from users and make MPI work
without a GPU-specific MPI interface. The application can benefit
from an MPI+GPU compatibility level similar to the MPI thread
levels. Currently, the GPU compatibility level is simply assumed.
While MPI+Threads is successful on the compatibility side of
MPI+X, the performance side has been a multi-decade struggle.
With MPI+Threads—in particular, at the MPI_THREAD_MULTIPLE
thread level—applications today are still likely to meet dismal performance. This performance is due to the extra critical sections
introduced by MPI communications. Much research has been done
on both the application side [14] and implementation side [1, 11, 16]
to address the performance of MPI+Threads. To reach good performance, applications need to make sure that the communications
can happen concurrently, and the implementations need to map
the communications to multiple communication channels to allow
the communication to proceed in parallel. Without an explicit MPI
interface, making the latter mapping to match the application layer
concurrency remains an art. Mismatch will result in either incorrect results or the introduction of extra thread contention and bad
performance.
The performance story of MPI+GPUs is different from that of
MPI+Threads. Accelerators typically require special runtime to
coordinate between CPU and accelerator executions. The launching
and synchronization between CPU context and accelerator context
are carried out by the accelerator runtime. A key performance factor
here is how to minimize the launching and synchronization cost. To
optimize the performance, we need MPI operations to be enqueued
to an accelerator execution context and then let the accelerator
runtime manage its actual execution. In order to realize this new
mode of MPI operations, new MPI interfaces that work directly
with accelerator execution context are needed.
A common theme from the pursuit of performance in MPI+X is
the need for MPI to have the concept of execution context. In this
paper we survey the current status of MPI+Threads and MPI+GPUs
and propose a new MPI concept, called MPIX stream, that can be
used to represent execution context from other runtimes. MPIX
stream allows explicit coordination for MPI+Threads and enables
direct GPU runtime operation for MPI communications.
arXiv:2208.13707v2 [cs.DC] 30 Aug 2022
, Hui Zhou, Ken Raffenetti, Yanfei Guo, and Rajeev Thakur
2 BACKGROUND
2.1 MPI’s Execution Model
Among the four MPI thread levels, only MPI_THREAD_MULTIPLE
requires clarification on its execution model. The other three are all
serial execution model enforced by applications. For MPI_THREAD_-
MULTIPLE, the current guiding principle is as follows: “When a
thread is executing one of these (MPI) routines, if another concurrently running thread also makes an MPI call, the outcome will be
as if the calls executed in some order” [6]. In another words, MPI is
an outcome-dictated serial execution model.
A naïve implementation of the serial execution model is to impose a global critical section for every MPI call and yield only during
its progress loop. With the global critical section, if two threads
concurrently call MPI communication functions, both threads not
only are serialized at the point of the MPI operation but also incur a
significant cost from the synchronization, resulting in performance
worse than if all communications are called from a single thread.
However, an implementation is allowed to “optimize,” making some
parts or whole communications parallel as long as the outcome is
not affected.
What is an outcome in MPI? Unfortunately, this is not clearly
specified in the MPI standard and thus is a source of ambiguity and
debate. Nevertheless, some consensus has been reached on what is
and what is not an outcome. For example, a message delivery order
is not an MPI outcome. A second sequentially issued message is
allowed to be delivered before the first one. On the other hand, a
message matching order is an MPI-defined outcome. Two sequentially issued sends that both match the same receive are guaranteed
to match the first one before the second one. If we ignore outcomes
that are outside the MPI standard, then an MPI implementation can
execute some of the communications in parallel as long as there is
no matching order between them. For example, messages issued
from different communicators are matched independently. If assertions that no wildcard tag matching will be used, then messages
using different tags can also be carried out in parallel.
This strategy raises two issues. First, the consensus is not universal. Certainly outcomes occur outside those specified by the MPI
standard. For example, what if the serialization or parallelization
of the communication is an application-intended outcome? Second,
communicators or tags are not perfect identification of concurrent
execution context. Using communicators or tags to sideload the
expression of parallelism may result in convoluted code yet still
not necessarily be able to achieve perfect parallelization.
2.2 Network Endpoints
Modern high-speed interconnection fabrics are designed with capabilities to support communication by multiple execution threads.
Generally, this is done by allowing separate fabric resources to
be allocated. In this paper we refer to these allocated fabric resources as network endpoints. Communications can be carried out
concurrently from separate endpoints. The network endpoints are
abstractions over hardware capability and may include software
contexts such as address table, message queues, and completion
event queues. In libfabric [9], a network endpoint may be represented by a domain, an endpoint, or a scalable endpoint. In UCX [10],
a network endpoint is typically represented by a UCP worker.
MPI implementations that utilize network endpoints also need
to allocate their own internal communication context to isolate
global states that are needed during a communication. For best performance, these implementation-level contexts need to be matched
to the network endpoints. Both MPICH and Open MPI have implemented such communication contexts. In MPICH, it is referred to as
the virtual communication interface (VCI) [17]. In Open MPI, it is referred to as the communication resources instance (CRI) [11]. In this
paper we generally refer to these contexts as network endpoints.
Network endpoints are a finite resource. More endpoints beyond
a hardware’s capability will be serialized at the hardware anyway
and will incur more overhead in managing the multiple endpoints.
A limit is often imposed by a network library and sometimes by a
network driver. It is common to have a limit matching the number
of cores in a node.
Concurrent access to a single network endpoint is not allowed,
or it will result in data race and state corruption. Thus, a critical
section around the access of each network endpoint is necessary
unless it can be guaranteed that concurrent usages will not occur.
2.3 Nonlocal Nature of Communication
While both thread contexts and network endpoints are local process
concepts, a communication necessarily involves a pair of network
endpoints from both the local process and the remote process. When
one does not specify a network endpoint in a communication, as
is the case with the current MPI standard, the implementation
chooses a default network endpoint for both the local process and
remote process. If this default choice is a constant choice, then
all communications are serialized on both the sender side and the
receiver side. Implicit schemes or semi-explicit schemes via hints
can be used to hash the network endpoints’ choice in order to
achieve parallel communications. The hashing algorithm must be
deterministic and consistent for both the sender side and receiver
side. If the sender side sends a message to a remote endpoint that
does not expect to receive it, either the message will get lost or
heavy synchronization will occur in order to move the message to
the receiving context.
Implicit hashing schemes often employ certain enforcement policies. A typical policy is to enforce a one-to-one mapping of endpoints. If we assign a sequential id to each network endpoint in a
process, then a one-to-one mapping allows communications only
between network endpoints with the same id. With this policy, network endpoints can be easily determined by hashing common values between sender and receiver, such as communicator id, sender
and receiver ranks, and tags.
Another policy is to allow the sender to send from any network
endpoint but receive only from a default network endpoint. With
this policy, the sender side can easily achieve concurrent sends by
hashing local information or even by random assignment. Since
messages are all received by a single network endpoint, however,
the overall message rates are limited by the single receiving thread.
The two policies match to the two common communication
patterns illustrated in Figure 1: the one-to-one pattern and the Nto-1 pattern. In a one-to-one pattern, one thread from one process
communicates only to one thread in other processes. An example of
a one-to-one pattern is the stencil application, where a partition for
MPIX Stream: An Explicit Solution to Hybrid
MPI+X Programming ,
T1
T2
T3
T4
T1
T2
T3
T4
T1
T2
T3
Tn
T1
T2
T3
Tn
(a) (b)
Figure 1: Typical MPI+Threads communication patterns: (a)
one-to-one pairwise mapping; (b) N-to-1 mapping.
T1 T2
T3 T4
T1 T2
T3 T4
T1 T2
T3 T4
T1 T2
T3 T4
Figure 2: Communication patterns in a 2-D stencil partition.
a single thread only shares a halo region with another thread in the
neighbor processes (see Figure 2). Note that the pairing of threads
may depend on the geometry layout and may not correspond to
the ordering of the thread numbers. In an N-to-1 pattern, multiple
threads may send messages to other processes, but a single thread
in each process is dedicated to receive all messages. An example
of an N-to-1 pattern is a task-based application, where multiple
threads run tasks and generate events and where a single progress
thread polls and responds to events.
2.4 GPU Queuing Stream
Graphics processing units (GPUs) are common components today in
high-performance computing clusters. GPU programming imposes
its own execution model. A common concept in GPU programming is an abstract execution queue. In NVIDIA’s CUDA runtime,
this is referred to as a CUDA stream. Unlike a thread, calls do not
directly run on the execution queue. Instead, the operations are
enqueued, and the GPU runtime will dispatch the operations to
GPU kernels asynchronously. The execution queue can be generalized as an execution graph with explicit dependency. An execution
graph may allow the GPU runtime more flexibility in optimizations. A sequential queue, on the other hand, often contains explicit
synchronizations that may prevent optimization.
With GPU-aware MPI implementations [15], MPI functions can
be called to send from or receive into GPU memory directly. However, MPI functions are still implemented to execute entirely in a
CPU context. Thus, full CPU/GPU synchronizations are necessary.
When the application relies on the GPU running computations,
the full CPU/GPU synchronization imposes a great performance
penalty.
To break the performance bottleneck, MPI needs to enable partial CPU/GPU synchronization, directly embed synchronization
into the GPU kernel, or explicitly expose dependency by using a
facility such as a CUDA graph. One way to do so is to pass the GPU
runtime execution context to MPI so that the MPI implementation
can directly operate under the GPU context. In the case of CUDA,
this may mean passing the CUDA stream object into MPI send and
receive functions.
In the GPU execution context, examples including CUDA stream
and SYCL queue are often asynchronous. This poses another challenge on working with MPI’s execution model. How do we assess
matching order when the issuing order of the operation itself is not
deterministic? Unlike in the MPI+Threads case where a default serialization model makes sense, MPI+GPUs will need a new concept
to accommodate the foreign execution context.
3 PROPOSAL OF MPIX STREAM
We propose a new MPI object, called MPIX stream, and a set of new
APIs to allow users to explicitly identify their thread context and
GPU queuing context. We use the prefix MPIX instead of MPI to
refer to objects and functions that are proposed in this paper and
not (yet) officially part of MPI.
3.1 MPIX Stream
First, we introduce MPIX stream as an abstract concept to facilitate
a direct mapping from user-level runtime execution contexts to MPI
execution contexts. To MPI, an MPIX stream represents a local serial
execution context. Any runtime execution contexts outside MPI, as
long as the serial semantic is strictly followed, can be associated
to an MPIX stream. Examples include kernal threads, user-level
threads, GPU queuing streams, or even code across multiple threads
with serialized synchronizations.
To illustrate, in the following two pseudocode listings, we use
MPIR_SEND_ON_STREAM to represent an arbitrary MPI operation,
and stream_1 represents a specific MPIX stream object that is
associated with the MPI operation. Because in both listings, the
MPI operations are strictly serialized, both are valid usages of MPIX
stream.
Listing 1: Pseudocode using MPIX stream within a single
thread
{
/* within a single thread */
MPIR_SEND_ON_STREAM ( stream_1 , msg1 ) ;
MPIR_SEND_ON_STREAM ( stream_1 , msg2 ) ;
}
Listing 2: Pseudocode using MPIX stream from two threads
with explicit thread synchronization
{
, Hui Zhou, Ken Raffenetti, Yanfei Guo, and Rajeev Thakur
/* Thread 1 */
MPIR_SEND_ON_STREAM ( stream_1 , msg1 ) ;
THREAD_BARRIER () ;
}
{
/* Thread 2 */
THREAD_BARRIER () ;
MPIR_SEND_ON_STREAM ( stream_1 , msg2 ) ;
}
Note that pseudocode is used in these examples, and in particular,
MPIR_SEND_ON_STREAM is not a proposed API. We will describe the
actual APIs later in this section. The examples also illustrate that it
is the users’ responsibility to map their thread context to the MPIX
stream. This relieves the burden of MPI having to synchronize
between threads, which can be thread runtime dependent.
To create an MPIX stream, one calls MPIX_Stream_create.
int MPIX_Stream_create ( MPI_Info info , MPIX_Stream
* stream )
Info hints can be used to create implementation-supported special
streams, for example, a CUDA stream. Otherwise, MPI_INFO_NULL
can be used. Whether the returned stream is backed by distinct
network endpoints is implementation dependent. For MPI thread
contexts, we recommend allocating unique network endpoints for
each new stream. This approach allows programming the application with a predictable performance. The implementation should
return failure if it runs out of network endpoints. With unique endpoints and the strict serial execution context, the implementation
may safely skip critical sections in the communication path. At the
extreme end of the strong scaling, even an uncontended critical
section can be too expensive.
The implementation may also assign a single network endpoint
to multiple MPIX streams, allowing applications to create more
streams than available network endpoints. For example, network
endpoints can be assigned to a newly created stream in a roundrobin fashion. This may provide flexibility for some applications.
We note that a per-endpoint critical section is necessary to prevent
concurrent access to network endpoints.
Because network endpoints are finite resources, users should
free the stream to make the resource available for future allocation.
int MPIX_Stream_free ( MPIX_Stream * stream )
The network resource can be deallocated only when all the operations using the stream have been completed. We imagine that
whether a deallocation is successful is important feedback for users.
In particular, a failed or delayed deallocation may prevent a future
MPIX_Stream_create from succeeding. Thus, MPIX_Stream_free
may fail with an appropriate error code if the internal resource
deallocation cannot be completed.
GPU streams emphasize lightweight synchronization between
the CPU and accelerator. Thus, having concurrent CPU communications may not be as important as in multithreaded programming.
In addition, an implementation may choose to use a dedicated
CPU thread to progress all GPU stream communications. Thus,
GPU streams are likely to be assigned with duplicate network endpoints. On the other hand, having dedicated network endpoints for
GPU stream-related communications is likely beneficial so that the
progress thread needs to poll only a few network endpoints rather
than polling global progress and contending with traffic on other
CPU threads.
For backward compatibility, MPIX_STREAM_NULL is defined. Operations on MPIX_STREAM_NULL have the same semantics as do
conventional operations without explicit streams.
3.2 Passing Opaque Binary Info Hints
Currently, an MPI_Info object supports values only as strings. A
GPU queuing object not only is not a string but is often opaque to
the user. For example, is a CUDA stream an integer or a pointer,
or could it be neither? To pass an opaque binary as a string, we
need some encoding scheme that users can use to encode and
implementations can consistently decode. We propose a new MPI
function for this purpose.
int MPIX_Info_set_hex ( MPI_Info info , const char *
key , void * value , int vallen )
An implementation can choose any binary to ASCII encoding to
implement this function. For completeness, there should be a corresponding MPIX_Info_get_hex function. For this proposal, however,
we focus on how to let users pass the GPU queuing object into MPI.
Since getting the object back from MPI is not critical, we are not
proposing the retrieving function here.
3.3 MPIX Stream Communicator
Once an MPIX stream is created, it is possible to define MPI operation APIs that directly use the stream as an argument to each operation. This has two drawbacks, however. First, we will need to create
a new API for every MPI operation, from MPI_Send, MPI_Isend, to
MPI collectives and MPI remote memory access (RMA) operations.
Not only does it take considerable effort to maintain an inflated
standard, but it is also a burden for users to learn these APIs. Second,
it is not sufficient to add only a local stream to an operations argument. We must add an argument for a remote stream as well unless
we want to restrict to an arbitrary policy. For collectives, this may
require an array of stream arguments, one for every participating
process. Even for one-sided RMA operations, a specific targeting
stream may be critical if the user wants to dedicate a progress
thread to drive passive progress. Unlike local streams, identifying
remote streams per operation is cumbersome for the user.
Thus we propose the MPIX stream communicator.
int MPIX_Stream_comm_create ( MPI_Comm parent_comm ,
MPIX_Stream stream , MPI_Comm * stream_comm )
This is a collective operation. Stream information from all processes or its network endpoint address can be Allgathered and
stored locally. All conventional MPI operations can be issued to a
stream communicator without additional parameter changes.
If the parent_comm is also a stream communicator, it is treated
as a normal communicator. That is, the stream attached to the
parent_comm is discarded in the new communicator.
Each stream is still local to each process, and streams do not
need to agree in any aspects between processes. In particular, any
process is allowed to use MPIX_STREAM_NULL in constructing the
stream communicator. The operation context is dictated by each