On Consensus Algorithms: Paxos, Viewstamped Replication and Raft. Why Consensus despite FLP? | by explore01 | Medium

Sitemap

Open in app

Sign up

Sign in

Medium Logo

Get app

Write

Search

Sign up

Sign in

# On Consensus Algorithms: Paxos, Viewstamped Replication and Raft. Why Consensus despite FLP?

explore01

30 min read

Sep 2, 2024

--

1

Listen

Share

This article is more like a review that describes and compares several consensus algorithms, Paxos (Lamport, 1998), viewstamped replication (Oki & Liskov, 1988) (Liskov, 2012) and Raft (Diego & et al., 2014). The article also investigates the relationship between consensus algorithms and FLP (the paper “Impossibility of Distributed Consensus with One Faulty Process”) (Fischer & et al., 1985), and makes a classification of the algorithms based on relaxation of assumptions in FLP. The article heavily cites and quotes from academic articles so that readers can get a grasp of the original thoughts of those scholars. It also quotes opinions from online blogs and the industry. Some personal comments are also made.

Whenever encountering multiple solutions to one problem, it is helpful to ask: What are the pros and cons of each solution? What are the differences between the solutions? What categories can be used to classify those solutions and how to classify them?

This is a lengthy article. Hope the review and citation of many articles may provide a good starting point to dive into the interesting area: consensus algorithms.

## What are consensus algorithms?

A consensus protocol must satisfy the following properties (Consensus (Computer Science)) (Chase, 2007):

- Termination: Eventually, every correct process decides some value.
- Integrity: If all the correct processes proposed the same value v, then any correct process must decide v. (and/or “validity” (Consensus, FLP, and Paxos, 2018) (Kleppmann, 2017))
- Agreement: Every correct process must agree on the same value.

In the article (Lamport, 1977), Lamport wrote, “To prove the correctness of a program, one must prove two essentially different types of properties about it, which we call safety and liveness properties.” “A safety property is one which states that something will not happen.” “A liveness property is one which states that something must happen.”

Or we rephrase it as (Consensus, FLP, and Paxos, 2018):

- Safety: bad things will not happen
- Liveness: good things will happen

In the case of distributed consensus,

- safety: agreement, integrity
- liveness: termination.

## FLP and consensus algorithms

## What is FLP?

The paper “Impossibility of Distributed Consensus with One Faulty Process” (often referred to as FLP) (Fischer & et al., 1985) proves consensus cannot be solved for a distributed asynchronous deterministic system with one faulty process, or every protocol for this problem has the possibility of nontermination. Then why do consensus algorithms still exist?

First, FLP does not say consensus cannot be achieved. For example, whenever a configuration becomes a uni-valent, it will remain this way forever, which is a consensus solution. FLP says: consensus is not always possible (Sergey, 2021).

(Aguilera, 2010) writes: “the consensus impossibility says that, given any purported solution, the consensus decision may keep getting delayed forever if processes are scheduled in an unfavorable way. This is different from the halting problem impossibility in two ways.” “First, the consensus impossibility result is based on a model where processes can be scheduled according to the worst case, but in reality process scheduling tends to have a random aspect to it, and the probability of an unfavorable schedule could be small. Second, these unfavorable schedules produce a problem that is transient, not permanent: if processes fail to terminate because the schedule has been unfavorable, processes are still able to terminate subsequently if the schedule stops being unfavorable. A more enlightening formulation of the consensus impossibility result might be that any algorithm that ensures the safety properties of consensus could be delayed indefinitely during periods with no synchrony (the schedule is unfavorable). In fact, it can be shown that consensus is solvable when there is a very small amount of temporary synchrony in the system, namely, if there is a single link from one process to another such that this link is timely.”

Second, FLP is based on some assumptions. We can relax some assumptions, and achieve a practical consensus algorithm (less likely to remain indecisive for too long a time or forever). For example, Paxos is a popular consensus algorithm, but it does not guarantee termination (Lamport, 2001).

## Assumptions in FLP systems

First let us dive into the assumptions in FLP about the asynchronous deterministic distributed system used, based on the paper (Fischer & et al., 1985):

- “We do not consider Byzantine failures”,
- “and we assume that the message system is reliable. it delivers all messages correctly and exactly once.” “Every message is eventually delivered as long as the destination process makes infinitely many attempts to receive, but messages can be delayed, arbitrarily long, and delivered out of order.”
- “Crucial to our proof is that processing is completely asynchronous; that is, we make no assumptions about the relative speeds of processes or about the delay time in delivering a message.”
- “We also assume that processes do not have access to synchronized clocks, so algorithms based on time-outs, for example, cannot be used.”
- “Finally, we do not postulate the ability to detect the death of a process, so it is impossible for one process to tell whether another has died (stopped entirely) or is just running very slowly.”

The definition of an asynchronous distributed system is:

- No bounds on message transmission delays
- No bounds on process execution. The drift of a clock is arbitrary (no shared global clock)

FLP proves that among the three properties of a consensus protocol in an asynchronous deterministic distributed system: safety, liveness and fault tolerance cannot be achieved at the same time. It is sometimes called the “impossibility triangle” (Kuo, 2019).

Essentially, these impossibility results stem from the inherent difficulty of determining whether a process has actually crashed or is only “very slow” (Chandra & et al., 1996).

## Relaxation in FLP’s assumptions to achieve consensus

As the course slides (Consensus, FLP, and Paxos, 2018) points out:

FLP’s Strong Assumptions are:

- Deterministic actions at each node
- Asynchronous network communication
- All “runs” must eventually achieve consensus

If we relax some of those assumptions, we can achieve consensus in practice. The relaxations correspond to each of the strong assumptions from (Consensus, FLP, and Paxos, 2018) are:

- Deterministic actions at each node
- Relaxation: Randomized algorithms can achieve consensus
- Asynchronous network communication
- Relaxation: Synchronous or even partial synchrony is sufficient
- All “runs” must eventually achieve consensus
- Relaxation: In practice, many “runs” achieve consensus quickly
- Relaxation: In practice, “runs” that never achieve consensus happen vanishingly rarely

(Both are true with good system designs)

The article (Janik, 2019) expressed a similar argument about relaxations of assumptions or requirements:

“So what can we do? Although the situation might seem hopeless at first, it is not the end of the world. Here are our options:”

- “extend/change the model. Apart from the synchronous model, which we explained in the previous section, there are several other solutions (randomized algorithms, partially synchronous models, unreliable failure detectors), all of which extend the asynchronous model in some way (we won’t explore these further as that would require series of its own).”
- “loosen the algorithm requirements. For example, instead of all healthy nodes having to agree on a value, it might be enough if the majority agrees (safety). Or we accept that the algorithm might not always terminate (liveness), etc.”

Compared to (Consensus, FLP, and Paxos, 2018), we feel that the statement in (Janik, 2019) is not as clear as (Consensus, FLP, and Paxos, 2018). First, they put several solutions (randomized algorithms, partially synchronous models, unreliable failure detectors) in one category of “extend(ing) the asynchronous model in some way”. What corresponding characteristics in the original FLP model are they extending from?

Second, it says “instead of all healthy nodes having to agree on a value, it might be enough if the majority agrees (safety)”. In my personal opinion, it is not correct. By definition, a consensus algorithm requires that “All nonfaulty processes that make a decision are required to choose the same value” (Fischer & et al., 1985). The majority to vote (or agree) does not mean the majority to decide on the same value.

The article “Implementing Trustworthy Services Using Replicated State Machines” (Schneider & et al., 2010) discusses the relationship between the replica-coordination protocol and consensus protocol. They pointed out: “the replica-coordination protocol must include some sort of consensus protocol”. “The impossibility of implementing a deterministic consensus protocol in the asynchronous model leaves three options.”

Option I: Abandon Consensus

Well, since our problem is consensus protocols, abandoning consensus is not in our consideration.

Option II: Employ Randomization

Option III: Sacrifice Liveness (Temporarily)

Aguilera proposed some consensus solutions (Aguilera, 2010): “The consensus problem has solutions in synchronous models, in models of partial synchrony, or in models with unreliable failure detectors. These solutions typically require that there exist an upper bound t on the number of failures in the system.”

(Pedone & et al., 2010) describes two models to solve consensus: the partially synchronous system model and the asynchronous system augmented with failure detectors model. “Roughly speaking, a partially synchronous system is a system that is initially asynchronous and eventually becomes synchronous.” A basic round model abstraction is proposed to express consensus algorithms (Dwork & et al., 1988).

The article “Unreliable failure detectors for reliable distributed systems” (Chandra & Toueg, 1996) made some review that to circumvent these impossibility results, previous research focused on:

- the use of randomisation techniques,
- the definition of some weaker problems and their solutions,
- or the study of several models of partial synchrony.

They “propose to augment the asynchronous model of computation with a model of an external failure detection mechanism that can make mistakes.” “Failure detectors can be viewed as a more abstract and modular way of incorporating partial synchrony assumptions into the model of computation. Instead of focusing on the operational features of partial synchrony”, “we can consider the axiomatic properties that failure detectors must have in order to solve Consensus. The problem of implementing a certain type of failure detector in a specific model of partial synchrony becomes a separate issue; this separation affords greater modularity.” They “argue that partial synchrony assumptions can be encapsulated in the unreliability of failure detectors.” Thus, their approach” can be used to unify several seemingly unrelated models of partial synchrony.” “From this more abstract point of view, the question “What is the least amount of synchrony sufficient to solve Consensus?” translates to “What is the weakest failure detector sufficient to solve Consensus?””.

In summary, we will classify consensus algorithms into the following 3 categories based on relaxations of FLP assumptions.

- Non-deterministic asynchronous models (introducing randomization)
- Partial synchronous models (failure detectors can be viewed as a more abstract and modular way of partial synchronous models)
- Non-perfect liveness

## Non-deterministic asynchronous models

Non-deterministic asynchronous models use randomized algorithms.

The article (Aspnes) gives an intuitive story: “Imagine two pedestrians trying to pass each other in a hallway, where they need to reach consensus on whether to pass on the left or on the right. Each initially has a preference for which way they want to go (e.g. right for Americans and left for Britons), and from the FLP result we know that if the pedestrians are deterministic and have their timing controlled by an adversary, each will give up and adopt the other pedestrian’s preference at exactly the same time. The results are both embarrassing (starvation) and implausible (doesn’t happen in real life).”

“A solution is for one or both of the pedestrians to announce that they are choosing a new preference by flipping a coin. This gives a 50% probability that both will agree with each other, even if only one of the pedestrians flips a coin. Thus after a constant number of coin-flips, both pedestrians agree, and (assuming they can detect this agreement), they will have solved consensus.”

Ben-Or’s algorithm (Ben-Or, 1983) (for proof, see (Aguilera & et al., 2012)) is one randomized consensus algorithm.

The course slide (Ellis, 2019) on randomized consensus made a comment: “Does anyone actually use this? As far as I know, not really. (Except in proof-of-stake cryptocurrency systems, more on that later.)” It is considered to be not efficient in practice.

## Partial synchronous models

## Paper “Consensus in the Presence of Partial Synchrony”

The article (Dwork & et al., 1988) introduced the concept of partial synchrony in a distributed system, and proposed consensus protocols for partially synchronous distributed systems for different types of faults. The paper was awarded the Edsger W. Dijkstra Prize in Distributed Computing in 2007 (2007 Edsger W. Dijkstra Prize in Distributed Computing). This method is more like a non-leader based algorithm, compared to others such as Paxos (Lamport, 1998), Viewstamped replication (Liskov, 2012) and Raft (Diego & et al., 2014).

“In a synchronous system, there is a known fixed upper bound Δ on the time required for a message to be sent from one processor to another and a known fixed upper bound Φ on the relative speeds of different processors.”

According to the article, we can have a summary about the definition of synchronous, partial synchronous and asynchronous.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

Similar ideas apply to Φ, the relative speeds of different processors.

The article illustrates 4 types of faults: processors crash (fail-stop faults), fail to send or receive messages when they should (omission faults), or send erroneous messages with authentication (Byzantine faults with authentication), and send erroneous messages without authentication (Byzantine faults without authentication). The resiliency means the maximum number of faulty processors that can be tolerated in one consensus protocol.

The section of 3.1 “DEFINITION OF THE MODE” describes that: “In the basic round model, processing is divided into synchronous rounds of message exchange.” “Not all messages that are sent need arrive; some can be lost. However, we assume that there is some round GST, such that all messages sent from correct processors to correct processors at round GST or afterward are delivered during the round at which they were sent.”

The protocols “distributed clocks” “give the processors some approximately common notion of time.” In order for the model to work, “consensus protocols for partially synchronous processors use new protocols for fault-tolerant “distributed clocks” that allow partially synchronous processors to reach some approximately common notion of time.” “The processors had a common notion of time that allowed time to be divided into rounds.” The consensus protocols “are simulated by letting each processor use its private clock to determine which round it is in.”

How do the distributed clocks handle unknown delta? The article writes: “It is helpful to view each situation as a game between a protocol designer and an adversary. If delta is known, the adversary names an integer Δ, and the protocol designer must supply a consensus protocol that is correct if Δ always holds. If delta is unknown, the protocol designer supplies the consensus protocol first, then the adversary names a Δ, and the protocol must be correct if that Δ always holds. If delta holds eventually, the adversary picks Δ, the designer (knowing Δ) supplies a consensus protocol, and the adversary picks a time T when Δ must start holding.”

Then how does a processor determine which round it is in? “Fix R = 3N + 2D +2, where, as before, D = + 3. Each processor uses its private clock to determine the round of algorithm A currently being simulated. Namely, if r-1RcisrR (r — l), then processor pi determines at real time s that the current round is r. Processors label messages with round numbers. As long as a processor determines that the current round is r, it uses its protocol simulation Steps to simulate steps of round r in the basic model.”

The article provides consensus protocols to solve the three situations and shows the maximum resilience in various cases. The three situations are:

- partially synchronous communication and synchronous processors,
- partially synchronous communication and processors,
- partially synchronous processors and synchronous communication.

Failure types include: fail-stop, omission, authenticated Byzantine, Byzantine.

One article (Brooker, 2014) made the comment about the algorithm: “Consensus in the Presence of Partial Synchrony” is one of three solutions to the consensus problem from the late 1980s. The others, Oki and Liskov’s Viewstamped Replication (Oki & Liskov, 1988) and Lamport’s P a xos(Lamport, 1998), are arguably more general and perhaps more interesting solutions, but this one is still very influential. The algorithms in Consensus in the Presence of Partial Synchrony are interesting because they break the problem up differently from both Oki and Liskov and Lamport, and provide real insight into the structure of the consensus problem. The algorithms appear to be more complex and more cumbersome than either VR or Paxos, mostly because of the way they execute ballots in rounds. Still, this is very interesting stuff.”

Why is (Dwork & et al., 1988) perceived less general? My personal opinion is that it relies on distributed clocks to maintain synchronous rounds of message exchange, which is not efficient. In addition, lack of a leader, more messages are needed to deliver.

Lamport made comments (Lamport, 1998): “The theorems on which the Synod protocol is based are similar to results obtained by Dwork, Lynch, and Stockmeyer [Dwork et al. 1988]. However, their algorithms execute ballots sequentially in separate rounds, and they seem to be unrelated to the Synod protocol.”

The article (Abraham, 2019) reviewed the algorithm, and states that:“This Partial synchrony model is also (implicitly) used in two other publications from around the same time: Lamport’s Paxos and Oki and Liskov’s viewstamped replication (Oki & Liskov, 1988).”

## Algorithms with failure detectors

Some consensus algorithms with failure detectors are proposed, such as (Chandra & Toueg, 1996). “Failure detectors can be viewed as a more abstract and modular way of incorporating partial synchrony assumptions into the model of computation” (Chandra & Toueg, 1996).

## Consensus algorithms with non-perfect liveness

Paxos (Lamport, 1998), viewstamped replication (or abbreviated as VR) (Oki & Liskov, 1988) (Liskov, 2012) and Raft (Diego & et al., 2014) are widely used consensus algorithms that sacrifice liveness, which means in some rare situations, their systems may not terminate.

Those consensus algorithms are similar. Their differences will be described in more detail.

## Paxos

It would be fun to read the history of Paxos (The Writings of Leslie Lamport) provided by the author himself. The article appeared as SRC Research Report 49 in 1989, and was submitted to TOCS in 1990 but was not taken seriously. It was resubmitted and published in 1998 (Lamport, 1998). It won the ACM SIGOPS Hall of Fame Award in 2012.

The key difference between Paxos (Lamport, 1998) and (Dwork & et al., 1988) is that: the latter “consensus protocols for partially synchronous processors use new protocols for fault-tolerant “distributed clocks” that allow partially synchronous processors to reach some approximately common notion of time” (Dwork & et al., 1988).

The step in (Dwork & et al., 1988), “Processor pi then broadcasts a message (lock v, k) at round s + 1”, is similar to the step of Prepare messages in Paxos. “If any processor receives a (lock v, k) message at round s + 1,” …, “any earlier lock on v is released” is similar to the logic of acceptors’ promise not to accept earlier accept messages in Paxos.

The article “In search of an understandable consensus algorithm” points out that “Paxos has two significant drawbacks”. “The first drawback is that Paxos is exceptionally difficult to understand.”

“The second problem with Paxos is that it does not provide a good foundation for building practical implementations. One reason is that there is no widely agreed upon algorithm for multi-Paxos.” “There have been several attempts to flesh out and optimize Paxos, such as (Mazieres, 2007), (Van Renesse & et al., 2015), and (Kirsch & et al., 2008) but these differ from each other and from Lamport’s sketches.”

The essence in the single-decree Synod is to solve the consistency problem in the situation of president changes. However, it introduces the concept of president until section 2.4 “The Complete Synod Protocol”: “The complete protocol therefore included a procedure for choosing a single priest, called the president, to initiate ballots.”

At the same time, the 2nd condition in section 2.1 “Mathematical Results”, “The quorums of any two ballots in B have at least one priest in common”, is not necessary or practical. In the example in Fig. 1 different decrees can be proposed, which is confusing. The issue is from the fact that Paxos does not introduce the mechanism of log copy and overwriting from the quorum to the new president.

As Paxos article writes: “The complete Synod protocol was obtained from the basic protocol by requiring priests to perform steps 2–6 promptly, adding a method for choosing a president who initiated ballots, and requiring the president to initiate ballots at the appropriate times. Many details of the protocol are not known.”

For multi-decree Paxos, the ordering of decrees passing is not strongly guaranteed. “We cannot say precisely in what order decrees would be passed, especially without knowing how a president was selected.” It only satisfies the property below: “If decrees A and B are important and decree A was passed before decree B was proposed, then A has a lower decree number than B.” This is not sufficient in many practical application cases. To solve this problem, a president selection method can be proposed.

In section 3.3.3 “Bureaucrats”, it seems to address the above concern by the property “If two decrees are passed by different presidents, then one of the presidents proposed his decree after learning that the other decree had been proposed.” However, there is a subtle difference. Here it states that “if two decrees are passed”, however, the concern in the last paragraph includes the situations that the decrees may not be passed by the old president when the new president is selected. So the wording might be relaxed from “are passed” to “are proposed”.

According to (Lamport, 1998), “Logically, the parliamentary protocol used a separate instance of the complete Synod protocol for each decree number.” It let each instance (decree) record its own serie of ballots. For example, one lab source code (Paxos.go, 2015) from the course MIT-6.824 Distributed Systems shows the Paxos structure:

type InstanceStatus struct {

PrepareMax int

AcceptMax int

AcceptValue interface{}

DecidedValue interface{}

}

Compared to the three variables in the paper (Lamport, 1998) section 2.3 “The Basic Protocol”, the correspondence is as follows:

PrepareMax: lastTried[p]

AcceptMax: nextBal[p]

AcceptValue: prevVote[p]

In Google’s implementation (Chandra & et al., 2007), it is not clear what information is maintained for each log entry.

Another attempted implementation of multi-decree Paxos can be found in the article (Van Renesse & et al., 2015), which is very similar to the Viewstamped Replication algorithm (Liskov, 2012).

## Viewstamped replication (VR)

The Viewstamped Replication algorithm was proposed in 1988 (Oki & Liskov, 1988). In 2012, the author presented a revised version (Liskov, 2012). According to (Bonacci, 2018), “The original paper is harder to read as the terminology used is for distributed systems evolved over the years. The 2012 paper is much simpler to read and it touches on a number of possible optimisations over the protocol.” The video (Bonacci, 2018) used some concrete example data in the primary and the back replicas to show the implementation steps of the revised version in (Liskov, 2012).

Some information about the history of VR can be found in (Liskov, 2010). “Brian and I began working on replication in the fall of 1985. Brian completed his Ph.D. thesis in May 1988 (Oki, 1988) and a paper on our approach appeared in PODC in August 1988 (Oki & Liskov, 1988). These papers explained replication within the context of support for distributed transactions.” “The work on VR occurred at about the same time as the work on Paxos and without knowledge of that work.”

VR is less famous than Paxos. The author of the blog (Brooker, 2014) expresses his confusion why VR is less famous.

## Raft

Raft is proposed in the article (Diego & et al., 2014), with a purpose to provide a more understandable consensus algorithm, and also a better foundation for building practical systems. As the authors claimed, “Raft is similar in many ways to existing consensus algorithms (most notably, Oki and Liskov’s Viewstamped Replication)”, except several novel features.

In the article (Kelvich, 2022) compared Raft to Paxos: “underneath, it is a similar concept to Paxos, just put together in a well-thought-out manner: each node collocates Proposer/Acceptor/Learner; voting is the same Phase 1 from Paxos (albeit with different term selection rules); the replication process is a consequent execution of Phase 2; the leader acts as a proposer, and the follower act as an acceptor; some recovery problems are mitigated by not allowing the most lagged nodes to be elected; the description does not skip some parts of the protocol.”

## Differences between non-leader and leader based consensus algorithms

The method in “consensus in the presence of partial synchrony” (Dwork & et al., 1988) is more like a non-leader based consensus algorithm, while Paxos, Viewstamped replication and Raft are more like leader based algorithms.

The figure below illustrates steps for those two categories of methods.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

## Differences between Paxos, Raft, and VR

## Tables to summarize the corresponding terms and steps in different consensus algorithms

Then what are the differences between Paxos, Viewstamped Replication, and Raft?

In (Liskov, 2012), the authors of Viewstamped Replication states that:

“It differs from Paxos in that it is a replication protocol rather than a consensus protocol: it uses consensus, with a protocol very similar to Paxos, as part of supporting a replicated state machine. Another point is that unlike Paxos, VR did not require disk I/O during the consensus protocol used to execute state machine operations.”

The authors of Raft claimed (Diego & et al., 2014), “Raft is similar in many ways to existing consensus algorithms (most notably, Oki and Liskov’s Viewstamped Replication)”, except several novel features.

In addition, as there is lack of details for implementation of multi-Paxos in the original paper (Lamport, 1998), it is hard to make some concrete comparison in some aspects.

The table below summarizes the corresponding terms and steps among the different consensus algorithms.

Press enter or click to view image in full size

## Replicas need to keep a record of requests and their orders

In VR, when the replicas receive a Prepare message from the primary, the replicas need to keep a record of the client request and its order in the log. Similarly in Paxos, the president when receiving a BeginBallot message will keep a record of the proposed decree and the order. Why is keeping a record necessary?

Keeping records is to guarantee consistency when the old primary loses the connection with other replicas and a new primary is selected. While a new primary is being selected, the old primary may still function, commit, and send the result to the client. Then the new primary proceeds with the same request and sends the result to the client. The two results need to be the same. And if the old primary comes back, the committed operation in the old primary should be the same so that it does not need to be rolled over as rolling over is not practical in many cases.

The purpose of Prepare messages in Paxos is to keep a record of proposed decrees and their orders.

### How to keep the order of requests in the log?

To keep a new request in the order in one replica, the server needs to know there are no other requests from the primary that are in the front but just delivered later than the new request. If the request id is consecutive, or the request contains the last id, the replica can make an easy judgment whether the new request is the one immediately after the top entry in the log, based on its current log.

In the situation of one same primary

1. VR

In VR, in the situation of one same primary, the “primary advances op-number” for a new request, which means the op-number should be consecutive. With this knowledge, keeping the order of requests is implemented by the protocol that “a backup won’t accept a prepare with op-number n until it has entries for all earlier requests in its log.”

2. Paxos

In Paxos, the original paper (Lamport, 1998) writes: “We cannot say precisely in what order decrees would be passed, especially without knowing how a president was selected.” “Therefore, the protocol satisfied the following decree-ordering property. If decrees A and B are important and decree A was passed before decree B was proposed, then A has a lower decree number than B.”

In one attempted implementation (Van Renesse & et al., 2015), it is achieved by using consecutive numbers in slot_num, similar to op-number in VR.

3. Raft

Raft uses lastLogIndex to ensure the new entry is in the order in replicas. Similar to VR, “if the follower does not find an entry in its log with the same index and term, then it refuses the new entries.”

In the situation of view changes (new primary selection)

1. VR

“If a timeout expires without a communication from the primary, the replicas carry out a view change to switch to a new primary.” “The correctness condition for view changes is that every operation that has been executed by means of an upcall to the service code at one of the replicas must survive into the new view in the same order selected for it at the time it was executed.”

The new primary may not have the full log. It can get logs from other replicas and select as the new log the one contained in the message with the largest view-number ; if several messages have the same view-number it selects the one among them with the largest op-number.

In VR, when a view change happens, the new primary will notify the backups of a complete record of all past <view-number, op-number>, by sending a StartView message. “When other replicas receive the StartView message, they replace their log with the one in the message, set their op-number to that of the latest entry in the log, set their view-number to the view number in the message.” This way, replicas keep the order with the latest view-number and op-number.

2. Paxos

For the situation of view changes, the original paper (Lamport, 1998) of Paxos writes: “we don’t know the details involved in choosing a new president”.

The article (Van Renesse & et al., 2015) provides an implementation, where ballot_num is equivalent to view-id in VR, slot_num to op-number in VR, related to view change.

3. Raft

In Raft, term id corresponds to view id in VR. Raft claims one advantage over VR that “Raft uses the voting process to prevent a candidate from winning an election unless its log contains all committed entries.” “This means that log entries only flow in one direction, from leaders to followers, and leaders never overwrite existing entries in their logs.”

## Efficient recovery of a replica (a failed replica restarts to become a replica)

1. VR

A replica may crash. “When a replica recovers after a crash it cannot participate in request processing and view changes until it has a state at least as recent as when it failed” (Liskov, 2012). One solution is to save the states to the disk whenever one operation happens. However, this way causes some delay. VR comes up with an efficient way to handle recovery. Since those states are also stored at the other replicas, the information can be fetched to the recovering replica from the other replicas. The benefit is that background writes (non-real-time writes) are sufficient.

For example, logs are appended entries. The servers store the logs at specified checkpoints. The recovering replica can fetch the latest checkpoint from other replicas, and the entries from the time of the checkpoint to the current time are fetched from the primary.

When the recovering replica fetches the latest checkpoint from another replica, it has its own latest checkpoint. So the recovering replica needs to fetch only lacking entries, which can be sped up by using a Merkle tree, using levels of hash to compare differences of pages of data.

2. Paxos

“Legislators carried their ledgers at all times, and could always read the list of decrees and any note that had not been crossed out.” The paper does not give a step or term to replica recovery, section 3.3.2 “Long Ledgers” is addressing the issue. “A legislator who returned to the Chamber after an extended voyage had to do quite a bit of copying to bring his ledger up to date. To enable a legislator who had been gone for a short time to catch up without copying the entire law book, legislators kept a list of the past week’s decrees in the back of the book.”

The approach of keeping a list of the past week’s decrees is similar to having a checkpoint.

3. Raft

“If a follower or candidate crashes, then future RequestVote and AppendEntries RPCs sent to it will fail. Raft handles these failures by retrying indefinitely; if the crashed server restarts, then the RPC will complete successfully. If a server crashes after completing an RPC but before responding, then it will receive the same RPC again after it restarts. Raft RPCs are idempotent, so this causes no harm.”

However, if log inconsistencies exist, refer to the section “State transfer: replica catch up with logs”, where it describes how the leader forces the followers’ logs to duplicate its own, by decrements nextIndex.

## State transfer: replica catch up with logs

1. VR

“State transfer is used by a node that has gotten behind (but hasn’t crashed) to bring itself up-to-date.” The replica will send out a message to request a new log from another replica.

2. Paxos

The paper does not explicitly describe how to handle this situation.

3. Raft

“In Raft, the leader handles inconsistencies by forcing the followers’ logs to duplicate its own.” “The leader maintains a nextIndex for each follower, which is the index of the next log entry the leader will send to that follower.” “If a follower’s log is inconsistent with the leader’s, the AppendEntries consistency check will fail in the next AppendEntries RPC. After a rejection, the leader decrements nextIndex and retries

the AppendEntries RPC. Eventually nextIndex will reach a point where the leader and follower logs match. ”

## Reconfiguration

1. VR

The configuration is a sorted array containing the IP addresses of each of the 2f + 1 replicas.

Reconfiguration “allows the members of the group of replicas to change over time”. “Reconfiguration is needed to replace failed nodes that cannot be recovered, as well as for other reasons, e.g., to use more powerful computers as replicas, or to position the replicas in different data centers. The reconfiguration protocol can also be used to change the threshold, f , the number of failures the group is intended to handle”

“A reconfiguration is triggered by a special client request. This request is run through the normal case protocol by the old group. When the request commits, the system moves to a new epoch, in which responsibility for processing client requests shifts to the new group. However, the new group cannot process client requests until its replicas are up to date: the new replicas must know all operations that committed in the previous epoch. To get up to date they transfer state from the old replicas, which do not shut down until the state transfer is complete.”

2. Paxos

Section 3.3.6 “Choosing New Legislators” touches the topic, without production details.

3. Raft

Raft points out that some systems, e.g. (Liskov, 2012), “use the first phase to disable the old configuration so it cannot process client requests; then the second phase enables the new configuration.”

“In Raft the cluster first switches to a transitional configuration we call joint consensus; once the joint consensus has been committed, the system then transitions to the new configuration.” “The joint consensus allows individual servers to transition between configurations at different times without compromising safety. Furthermore, joint consensus allows the cluster to continue servicing client requests throughout the configuration change.”

## Summary of differences

Multi-Paxos in the original paper (Lamport, 1998) did not really describe a detailed implementation. Multi-Paxos is based on the single-decree Paxos. The authors of Raft complained that “Single-decree Paxos is dense and subtle: it is divided into two stages that do not have simple intuitive explanations and cannot be understood independently. Because of this, it is difficult to develop intuitions about why the single-decree protocol works.”

So here we put more words in the differences between VR (Liskov, 2012) and Raft (Diego & et al., 2014).

Raft claimed several novel features over VR:

1. Strong leader: Raft chooses a leader that has the most complete log.
2. Leader election: Raft uses randomized timers to avoid split votes.
3. Membership changes: Raft’s mechanism for changing the set of servers in the cluster uses a new joint consensus approach where the majorities of two different configurations overlap during transitions.

Interestingly, the self-proclaimed advantages by Raft are considered as weaknesses in (Greef, 2021) (Greef, 2020).

Regarding “strong leader”, Greef claimed that: “Raft has no mechanism to repair the new leader’s log” “Raft’s correctness (let alone availability) also depends entirely on “perfect” storage across the whole cluster”

Regarding “leader election”, Greef states that: “Raft also leans on randomized election timeouts to deal with its problem of split votes during leader election, which all (split votes and randomized timeouts) both add unnecessary latency to the leader election phase.” “Viewstamped Replication has no problem of split votes to begin with”. A side note, I am not clear how VR selects a new primary among a group of servers, so I am not clear whether it is true that VR has no issue of split votes.

A side note. Greef writes that: “Paxos does not do leader election but requires two RTTs to commit an op, with the advantage that any replica can lead for the op.” However, from the Paxos paper, it needs to select at least one president. Quote from the Paxos paper:

“For the complete protocol to satisfy the progress condition, the method for choosing the president needed only to satisfy the following presidential selection requirement: If no one entered or left the Chamber, then after T minutes exactly one priest in the Chamber would consider himself to be the president.” In “the Paxon Synod, having multiple presidents could only impede progress; it could not cause inconsistency. ”

The table below summarizes the difference between VR and Raft

Press enter or click to view image in full size

## Other interesting writings

This section lists some interesting writings that address the differences between different consensus algorithms.

The article (Van Renesse & et al., 2014) claims that Paxos employs active replication, while Viewstamped Replication and Zab employ passive replication:

“In active replication, at least f + 1 replicas each must execute operations. In passive replication, only the sequencer executes operations, but it has to propagate state updates to the backups. Depending on the overheads of executing operations and the size of state update messages, one may perform better than the other. Passive replication, however, has the advantage that execution at the sequencer does not have to be deterministic and can take advantage of parallel processing on multiple cores.”

However, I am confused about such a claim. The article (Liskov, 2012) says: “The server can be described as a deterministic state machine that performs client commands in some sequence.”

“The challenge for the replication protocol is to ensure that operations execute in the same order at all replicas in spite of concurrent requests from clients and in spite of failures.”

“The replicas also run the VR code. The VR code accepts requests from client proxies, carries out the protocol, and when the request is ready to be executed, causes this to happen by making an up-call to the service code at the replica. ”

This means each replica executes operations dictated by requests, instead of simple state updates.

There are some interesting online comments in ycombinator.com (Consensus Is Harder Than It Looks (2020), 2021) under a topic discussing a blog (Brooker, 2010).

Also some interesting blogs:

Understand Viewstamped Replication with Rust, Automerge, and TLA+ (Terzian, 2023),

Understand Paxos with Rust, Automerge, and TLA+ — Part 1: The Synod (Terzian, 2023),

Viewstamped Replication: The Less-Famous Consensus Protocol — Marc’s Blog (Brooker, 2014)

## References

Abraham, I. (2019, June 1). Synchrony, Asynchrony and Partial synchrony. Decentralized Thoughts. https://decentralizedthoughts.github.io/2019-06-01-2019-5-31-models/

Aguilera, M. (2010). Stumbling over consensus research: Misunderstandings and issues. Replication: theory and practice, 59–72.

Aguilera, M., & et al. (2012). The correctness proof of Ben-Or’s randomized consensus algorithm. Distributed Computing.

Aspnes, J. (n.d.). Randomized Consensus. http://www.cs.yale.edu/homes/aspnes/pinewiki/RandomizedConsensus.html

Ben-Or, M. (1983). Another advantage of free choice (extended abstract) completely asynchronous agreement protocols. Proceedings of the second annual ACM symposium on Principles of distributed computing.

Bonacci, B. (2018). Bruno Bonacci on Viewstamped Replication @PWL London. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1EzNa-zAYS8

Brooker, M. (2010). Consensus is Harder Than It Looks. Marc’s Blog. https://brooker.co.za/blog/2020/10/05/consensus

Brooker, M. (2014, May 10). The Essential Nancy Lynch — Marc’s Blog. https://brooker.co.za/blog/2014/05/10/lynch-pub

Brooker, M. (2014, May 19). Viewstamped Replication: The Less-Famous Consensus Protocol — Marc’s Blog. brooker.co.za. https://brooker.co.za/blog/2014/05/19/vr.html

Chandra, T.D., & et al. (1996). The weakest failure detector for solving consensus. Journal of the ACM (JACM).

Chandra, T. D., & et al. (2007). Paxos made live: an engineering perspective. Proceedings of the twenty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Principles of distributed computing.

Chandra, u. D., & Toueg, S. (1996). Unreliable failure detectors for reliable distributed systems. Journal of the ACM (JACM).

Chase, J. (2007). Distributed Systems, Failures, and Consensus. https://courses.cs.duke.edu/cps212/fall07/consensus.pdf

Consensus (computer science). (n.d.). Wikipedia. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consensus_(computer_science)

Consensus Is Harder Than It Looks (2020). (2021). https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=26075705

Daian, P. (2016). FLP Impossibility & Weakest Failure Detector. Cornell CS 6410: Advanced Systems, Schedule. https://www.cs.cornell.edu/courses/cs6410/2016fa/slides/18-distributed-systems-flp.pdf

Diego, O., & et al. (2014). In search of an understandable consensus algorithm. 2014 USENIX annual technical conference (USENIX ATC 14).

Dwork, C., & et al. (1988). Consensus in the presence of partial synchrony. Journal of the ACM (JACM).

Ellis, M. (2019). Randomized Consensus. CES 452: Distributed Systems, Washington University, 2019 Fall, Lecture 13. https://courses.cs.washington.edu/courses/cse452/19sp/slides/l13-benor.pdf

Fischer, M., & et al. (1985). Impossibility of distributed consensus with one faulty process. Journal of the ACM (JACM).

Greef, J. D. (2020). PaPoC ’21 Lightning Talk — Viewstamped Replication Made Famous.

Greef, J. D. (2021, July 17). I very recently learned about VR (VSR?) and am wondering if someone can provide. Hacker News. https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=27862529

Howard, H. (2020). Paxos vs Raft: Have we reached consensus on distributed consensus? Proceedings of the 7th Workshop on Principles and Practice of Consistency for Distributed Data.

Janik, J. (2019). Connecting the Dots: FLP, BFT & Consensus Algorithms. https://hackernoon.com/connecting-the-dots-flp-bft-and-consensus-algorithms-m9r62bs1

Kelvich, S. (2022, August 2). Why does Neon use Paxos instead of Raft, and what’s the difference? Neon.tech. https://neon.tech/blog/paxos

Kirsch, J., & et al. (2008). Paxos for system builders: An overview. Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Large-Scale Distributed Systems and Middleware.

Kleppmann, M. (2017). Designing Data-intensive Applications: The Big Ideas Behind Reliable, Scalable, and Maintainable Systems. O’Reilly.

Kuo, W. (2019, August 30). From Distributed Consensus Algorithms to the Blockchain Consensus Mechanism. Alibaba Cloud. https://www.alibabacloud.com/blog/from-distributed-consensus-algorithms-to-the-blockchain-consensus-mechanism_595315

Lamport, L. (1977). Proving the correctness of multiprocess programs. IEEE transactions on software engineering.

Lamport, L. (1998). The part-time parliament. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems.

Lamport, L. (2001). Paxos made simple. ACM SIGACT News (Distributed Computing Column).

Liskov, B. (2010). From Viewstamped Replication to Byzantine Fault Tolerance. In Replication: theory and practice (pp. 132–160). Springer.

Liskov, B. (2012). Viewstamped replication revisited. Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory Technical Report at MIT.

Lloyd, W. (2018). Consensus, FLP, and Paxos. https://www.cs.princeton.edu/courses/archive/fall18/cos418/docs/L10-consensus.pdf

Lynch, N. (1989). A hundred impossibility proofs for distributed computing. Proceedings of the eighth annual ACM Symposium on Principles of distributed computing.

Mazieres, D. (2007). Paxos made practical.

Oki, B., & Liskov, B. (1988). Viewstamped replication: A new primary copy method to support highly-available distributed systems. Proceedings of the seventh annual ACM Symposium on Principles of distributed computing.

Oki, B., & Liskov, B. (1988). Viewstamped Replication: A New Primary Copy Method to Support Highly-Available Distributed Systems. Proc. of ACM Symposium on Principles of Dis- tributed Computing.

Oki, B.M. (1988, May). Viewstamped Replication for Highly Available Distributed Systems. [Technical Report MIT-LCS-TR-423, Laboratory for Computer Science, MIT, Cambridge, MA, ph.D. thesis].

Paxos.go. (2015). CodingYue / MIT-6.824. https://github.com/CodingYue/MIT-6.824/blob/5d88e52e58ff69bb87fe9d20d945895a457ae2ce/src/paxos/paxos.go#L80

Pedone, F., & et al. (2010). Modular Approach to Replication for Availability. In Replication: Theory and Practice (pp. 54–70).

Renesse, R. v., & Guerraoui, R. (2010). Replication Techniques for Availability. In Replication: Theory and Practice (pp. 32–53). Springer.

Schneider, F., & et al. (2010). Implementing Trustworthy Services Using Replicated State Machines. In Replication: Theory and Practice (pp. 161–177). Springer.

Sergey, I. (2021). 3. Week 03: Raft, FLP, CAP, and Byzantine Fault Tolerance — CS6213 2021. https://ilyasergey.net/CS6213/week-03-bft.html

Terzian, G. (2023). Understand Viewstamped Replication with Rust, Automerge, and TLA+. https://medium.com/@polyglot_factotum/understand-viewstamped-replication-with-rust-automerge-and-tla-7a94e9e4d553

Terzian, G. (2023, September 25). Understand Paxos — Part 1: The Synod. Medium. https://medium.com/@polyglot_factotum/understand-paxos-with-rust-automerge-and-tla-part-1-the-synod-371df5f16f45

2007 Edsger W. Dijkstra Prize in Distributed Computing. (2007).

Van Renesse, R., & et al. (2014). Vive la différence: Paxos vs. viewstamped replication vs. zab. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing.

Van Renesse, R., & et al. (2015). Paxos made moderately complex. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR).

Venkatasubramanian, N. (2022). Fault Tolerance Middleware for Distributed Systems. https://ics.uci.edu/~cs237/lecture2022/FT_2022.pdf

The Writings of Leslie Lamport. (n.d.). Leslie Lamport. https://lamport.azurewebsites.net/pubs/pubs.html?from=https://research.microsoft.com/users/lamport/pubs/pubs.html&type=path#lamport-paxos

Consensus Algorithms

Paxos

Viewstamped Replication

Raft

Flp

## Written by explore01

Written by explore01

86 followers

1 following

Software engineer and researcher. Ph.D. Worked at University of Miami, Google, etc.

## Responses (1)

See all responses

Help

Status

About

Careers

Press (pressinquiries@medium.com)

Blog

Privacy

Rules

Terms

Text to speech