# AIOS: LLM Agent Operating System

arXiv (Cornell University). Published: 2024-03-25. Preprint. 8 citations.

## Authors

- Kai Mei: h-index 13; 433 citations
- Zhu, Xi
- Xu, Wujiang
- Hua, Wenyue
- Jin, Mingyu
- Zelong Li: h-index 11; 503 citations
- Shuyuan Xu: h-index 20; 1,436 citations
- Ruosong Ye: h-index 5; 331 citations
- Yingqiang Ge: h-index 23; 2,450 citations
- Yongfeng Zhang: h-index 3; 29 citations

## Topics

- Multi-Agent Systems and Negotiation

---

# AIOS: LLM Agent Operating System

## Abstract

LLM-based intelligent agents face significant deployment challenges, particularly related to resource management. Allowing unrestricted access to LLM or tool resources can lead to inefficient or even potentially harmful resource allocation and utilization for agents. Furthermore, the absence of proper scheduling and resource management mechanisms in current agent designs hinders concurrent processing and limits overall system efficiency. To address these challenges, this paper proposes the architecture of AIOS (LLM-based AI Agent Operating System) under the context of managing LLM-based agents. It introduces a novel architecture for serving LLMbased agents by isolating resources and LLM-specific services from agent applications into an AIOS kernel. This AIOS kernel provides fundamental services (e.g., scheduling, context management, memory management, storage management, access control) for runtime agents. To enhance usability, AIOS also includes an AIOS SDK, a comprehensive suite of APIs designed for utilizing functionalities provided by the AIOS kernel. Experimental results demonstrate that using AIOS can achieve up to 2.1× faster execution for serving agents built by various agent frameworks.

## Introduction

In the field of autonomous agents, research efforts (Wooldridge & Jennings, 1995; Jennings et al., 1998; Bresciani et al., 2004) are made towards agents that can perceive environments, understand instructions, make decisions, take action and learn from feedbacks. The advent of large language models (LLMs) (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023a; Team et al., 2023) has brought new possibilities to the agent development Ge et al. (2023a) . Current LLMs have shown great power in understanding instructions (Ouyang et al., 2022; Chung et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023b; Geng et al., 2022) , reasoning and solving problems (Kojima et al., 2022; Nijkamp et al., 2022; Taylor et al., 2022; Hao et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2023) , and interacting with human users (Ross et al., 2023) as well as external environments (Driess et al., 2023; Brohan et al., 2023) . Built upon these powerful LLMs, emergent LLM-based agents (Ge et al., 2023a; Yao et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023; Deng et al., 2023; Packer et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024) can present strong task fulfillment abilities in diverse environments, ranging from virtual assistants to more sophisticated reasoning and problem-solving systems.

An illustrative example of an LLM-based agent's real-world task execution is demonstrated in Figure 1 , where a travel agent processes a trip organization request. The agent methodically decomposes this request into executable steps-booking flights, reserving accommodations, processing payments, and updating calendars according to user preferences. Throughout execution, the agent exhibits reasoning and decision-making capabilities derived from its LLM foundation, distinguishing it from traditional applications constrained by predetermined functions or workflows. Implementing this travel scenario requires the agent to seamlessly integrate LLM-related services (preference retrieval, API selection, response generation) with conventional OS services (disk access, software execution).

Current agent frameworks exhibit critical design limitations by granting agents direct access to system-level resources like LLMs and tools (Qin et al., 2024) , compromising resource optimization and introducing potential vulnerabilities. Without proper scheduling, agents can monopolize resources such as flooding the LLM with requests while others wait. The absence of effective resource management mechanisms significantly impairs system efficiency. Under concurrent conditions, existing frameworks (e.g., Autogen, Langchain) employ an inefficient trial-and-error approach for LLM calls: prompts are converted to tensors and loaded into GPU memory until CUDA memory limits trigger exceptions, forcing tensor deallocation and requiring multiple retry attempts, which substantially degrades system throughput in scenarios where numerous agents compete for limited LLM resources.

To mitigate above-mentioned limitations, we introduce AIOS, an architecture designed to serve LLM-based agents more efficiently. Our contributions are as below.

• New Agent-serving Architecture. We introduce AIOS, a novel LLM-based agent serving architecture. AIOS divides agent applications and resources for agents such as LLMs and tools into distinct layers, i.e., the application layer and the kernel layer. This separation facilitates systematic resource management, efficiency optimization, and safety enhancement.

• AIOS Kernel Design and Implementation. At the core of AIOS, we design and implement an AIOS kernel to encapsulate resource management abstractions. In this kernel, agent queries are decomposed into sub execution units (i.e., AIOS syscalls) to facilitate parallelism. We design an agent scheduler to orchestrate syscall execution across modules, while memory, storage, and tool managers and the LLM core are responsible for handling dispatched syscalls. We also design the context manager to handle context interruption and design the access manager to verify agent operations to ensure the reliability of the AIOS kernel.

• AIOS SDK Development. We develop the AIOS SDK, which provides a higher level abstraction of kernel functionalities, allowing developers to focus on application logic and higher-level functionalities without being burdened by complicated kernel details.

• Empirical Results. We conduct extensive evaluations of AIOS on agents developed using various agent frameworks. The results demonstrate that AIOS can maintain the performance of agents across standard agent benchmarks and can even enhance performance in benchmarks that involve tool calling. Furthermore, AIOS significantly improves execution efficiency, achieving up to a 2.1× increase in execution speed for serving agents across different frameworks. These experimental results underscore the effectiveness of AIOS in optimizing both agent performance and execution speed in serving agents.

## The Architecture of AIOS

As depicted in Figure 2 , the AIOS architecture is divided into three distinct layers: the application, kernel, and hardware layers. This layered design is intended to establish a clear separation of concerns within the system. Higher-level applications abstract the complexities of the underlying layers, interacting with them through well-defined interfaces such as software development kits (SDKs) and system calls.

Application Layer. The application layer leverages the AIOS SDK, providing interfaces for requesting system resources within AIOS. This design relieves agents from resource management while enforcing isolation by preventing direct resource manipulation. The AIOS SDK supports both native agent development and non-native agents adapted from Figure 2 : An overview of the AIOS architecture of distinct layers. Application layer facilitates the design and development of agent applications. Kernel layer manages core functionalities and resources to serve agent applications. Hardware layer controls and manages physical computing resources and devices to support kernel layer functionalities. diverse frameworks including ReAct (Yao et al., 2023) , Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) , Autogen (Wu et al., 2023) , Open-Interpreter (Lucas, 2024) , and MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2023) . Nonnative agents interact with AIOS kernel resources through adapter functions, while native development is streamlined via pre-defined APIs that invoke system calls. This abstraction allows developers to focus on agent logic rather than resource management details.

Kernel Layer. The kernel layer integrates two components: the traditional OS kernel for non-LLM computing tasks and our innovative AIOS kernel. Within the AIOS kernel, specialized modules process agent requests through system calls. A scheduler dispatches these calls to appropriate modules using advanced scheduling strategies (detailed in Section 3.3). We design a unified interface encapsulating LLMs as cores, akin to CPU cores, enabling integration of diverse LLM endpoints. To support LLM context switching, we implement a context manager with snapshot and restoration capabilities (Section 3.4). For efficient agent data handling, we develop a memory manager for runtime operations (Section 3.5) and a storage manager for persistent storage (Section 3.6). Additionally, a tool manager loads tools and resolves call conflicts for AIOS SDK supported tools (Section 3.7), while an access manager implements access control and user intervention protocols (Section 3.8).

Hardware Layer. The hardware layer consists of the physical components of the system, such as the CPU, GPU, memory, disk, and peripheral devices. The hardware layer is not the main focus of the work-AIOS kernel does not directly interact with the hardware but relies on OS system calls to access the physical resources in the hardware layer.

## AIOS Kernel

In this section, we start with an overview of the AIOS kernel, highlighting how each module collaborates with other modules to support integrated functionalities. Following this, we provide an in-depth look into the design and implementation of each module, discussing their roles and contributions to the overall AIOS architecture.

## Relationship and Connection between Modules

Within the AIOS kernel, agent queries are decomposed into categorized system calls (LLM processing, memory access, storage operations, tool usage) as shown in Figure 3 , with a comprehensive syscall catalog available in Appendix A.1. Each syscall is thread-bound and dispatched by the scheduler, which centralizes queue management across all modules. Syscalls are routed to appropriate module queues based on their attribute sets, with each 0.8 0.2

## Storage Queue

Figure 3 : How agent queries are decomposed into AIOS system calls and how AIOS system calls are dispatched and scheduled. We omit the access manager module here as the accessrelated system calls will not be dispatched by the scheduler.

module monitoring its designated queue for scheduled calls. Context manager will be triggered within LLM core for handling context interruptions instead of being scheduled.

## LLM Core

Due to the various deployment options of LLMs, e.g., which LLM is used, whether the LLM is hosted on cloud or on local device, what hardware conditions the LLM requires, or which inference framework is used, we encapsulate each LLM instance adopting different deployment options as a core, akin to a CPU core in a traditional operating system. This design allows us to treat each LLM instance as a dedicated processing unit, enhancing the modularity and extensibility within the AIOS architecture. To accommodate different LLM instances, we introduce a wrapper for each LLM instance and design unified system calls within this wrapper specifically for LLM inference. By abstracting an LLM instance as a core and implementing standardized system calls, AIOS provides a flexible way to integrate LLM instances under different deployment options, attributed to the modular design of the LLM core. Detailed information of LLM core is provided in Appendix A.2.

## Scheduler

We centralize all queues within the scheduler module rather than distributing them across processing modules, isolating request management responsibilities and allowing each module to focus solely on execution. This centralization simplifies cross-module task coordination and provides a unified scheduling framework. For managing system calls, we implement two classic algorithms: First-In-First-Out (FIFO), which processes calls in arrival order but may increase waiting times for later requests, and Round Robin (RR), which cycles through calls in time-sliced fashion for more balanced resource distribution. The RR strategy is supported by our context interrupt mechanism for LLM inference, detailed in Section A.3.

## Context Manager

LLM inference time creates bottlenecks through long-running system calls that monopolize resources. Our context interrupt mechanism addresses this via task interruption and resumption through snapshot and restoration operations. The context manager designs two approaches: text-based (for closed-source LLMs without logits access, saving decoded outputs) and logits-based (preserving intermediate search tree structure for finer-grained state restoration). The logits-based method is illustrated in Figure 4 . Using beam search (common in LLMs (Touvron et al., 2023b; Jiang et al., 2023; Biderman et al., 2023) ), with beam width 1 for simplicity, we demonstrate the process: When processing Determine whether there will be rain in the destination of flight UA057, the LLM evaluates candidate tokens at each step.

If suspended by the scheduler mid-generation, the context manager snapshots the interme- diate results. Upon resumption, it reloads this snapshot to continue from the suspension point, reaching the final answer: Search weather in Paris without restarting computation.

## Memory Manager

Unlike traditional OS memory managers handling physical RAM, AIOS's memory manager addresses agent interaction histories during runtime (Lerman & Galstyan, 2003; Zhang et al., 2024) , including conversation logs and tool-calling results. It manages memory structure, allocation, read/write operations, deletion, and updates. Agent memory resides in RAM by default, but when allocated space approaches capacity, the manager implements memory swapping between RAM and disk. When an agent's memory usage exceeds its block limit (e.g., 80% of allocation), the memory manager initiates a K-Least Recently Used (LRU-K) eviction policy, transferring items from RAM to disk via the storage manager (detailed in Section 3.6). LRU-K prioritizes retaining items in RAM that have been accessed at least K times recently, while moving less frequently accessed items to disk. This balances memory efficiency by offloading infrequently accessed data while ensuring retrievability when needed. Detailed implementations of memory manager are in A.5.

## Storage Manager

The storage manager handles persistent data storage for agents, including files or knowledge bases that agents depend on to run and the agent memories that need to be persistently stored. During an agent's runtime, when the agent's memory usage exceeds the allocated limit, the memory manager calls the storage manager to swap the data into the disk. Specifically, the storage manager reads and writes data based on the agent ID passed from the memory manager. In addition to the memory manager, the agent itself may also request to read and write data on disk during runtime, and these agent requests are also handled by the storage manager. Specifically, the agent calls the storage API in the SDK, which is further converted into storage-related system calls and put into the storage queue by the scheduler. The storage manager then processes the requests in the queue to fulfill the agent requests. The storage manager is implemented using local files and vector database (e.g., chromadb). Implementation details of the storage manager are included in Appendix A.6.

## Tool Manager

The tool manager in the AIOS kernel is responsible for managing a broad suite of API tools supported by the AIOS SDK.

Standardized Tool Loading. The manager employs a standardized interface to handle diverse tools uniformly, while incorporating parameter validation before execution to Figure 5 : Illustration of memory and storage manager as well as their relationship. An agent's memory item in its memory block will be evicted to storage if its memory usage exceeds the memory limit, which is set to 80% of the memory block size. This threshold is configurable through AIOS configuration.

prevent tool crashes. When invoked by name, the tool manager dynamically loads the tool instance including executables initialization and dependencies verification.

Resolution of Tool Call Conflicts. For tools with parallel access constraints, the system utilizes a hashmap to monitor real-time instance counts. Request processing involves hashmap verification against usage and parallel limits; upon detecting conflicts, the system advances to subsequent queue requests until identifying a conflict-free candidate. The implementation details are presented in Appendix A.7.

## Access Manager

The access manager in the AIOS kernel provides the following two key functionalities.

Access Control. The access manager regulates cross-agent data read/write operations by implementing privilege-based access control mechanisms. It assigns each agent to a specific privilege group and enforces permissions through a hashmap architecture that maps agent IDs to their corresponding privilege groups. Access requests are validated against this permission structure before execution, ensuring agents can only access resources of other agents within their shared privilege domain.

User Intervention. To mitigate risks of irreversible operations (deletion, overwrite, privilege modification), a user intervention interface is provided for user confirmation. This mandates explicit user verification before proceeding with potentially destructive operations on files or tools. Implementation details can be found in Appendix A.8.

## AIOS SDK

We design the AIOS SDK to streamline the development and integration of agents on the AIOS architecture. This SDK not only empowers developers to build agents that interact with the core functions in the AIOS kernel but also abstracts complex system calls, allowing developers to focus on the agent's internal workflows.

Tool Integration. To support diverse agent functionalities, the AIOS SDK integrates a wide range of tools sourced from various platforms and supports different cases of input-output modalities. Detailed information on these integrated tools is provided in Appendix B.3.

### Interaction Interface with the AIOS Kernel

To facilitate the utilization of functions provided by AIOS system calls in the AIOS kernel, the SDK defines different API functions that agents can use to invoke system calls and request resources.

Agent Framework Adapter. To support agents built with various agent creation frameworks, such as Autogen (Wu et al., 2023) , Open-Interpreter (Lucas, 2024) , and MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2023) , the AIOS SDK provides adapters for these frameworks. These adapters locate Table 1 : Evaluation of agent performance on benchmarks w/o and w/ AIOS, respectively. Success rate (SR%) is used as the metric for all the benchmarks. "-" represents methods that failed GAIA benchmark tasks due to lack of API support. the core functions in the aforementioned frameworks and redirect them to the functions in AIOS. This adaptation allows agents from different frameworks to operate within the AIOS environment without modification of the agent code. Further details on the core functions and specific adaptations for each agent framework are provided in Appendix B.5.

### Evaluation

In this section, we conduct experiments to answer the following research questions.

• RQ1: Can AIOS maintain or even enhance the performance of agents on standard benchmarks when running multiple agent instances simultaneously?

• RQ2: How effectively can AIOS optimize system execution throughput and reduce response latency when serving numerous agents built with different agent frameworks?

• RQ3: How scalable is AIOS as the number of concurrently running agents increases?

### Setup

Models. We use the GPT-4o-mini (Achiam et al., 2023) Hardware. Our experiments are conducted on an Ubuntu 22.04 machine equipped with NVIDIA RTX A5000 GPUs (24GB). We run all experiments using a single A5000 GPU.

Agent Frameworks. We conduct evaluation by running agents built from various popular agent frameworks: ReAct (Yao et al., 2023) , Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) , Autogen (Wu et al., 2023) , Open-Interpreter (Lucas, 2024) and MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2023) . Details of these agent frameworks are introduced in Appendix B.5.

Workloads. We evaluate on a resource-constrained scenario in which agents run concurrently with a single LLM deployed that can process only one prompt request at a time. To create these concurrent conditions, we set the maximum number of working threads to 250 by default, i.e., at most 250 agents can run concurrently at the same time. The impact of increasing the number of agents will be analyzed in Section 4.4. By default, we use RR as the scheduling strategy for AIOS to run agents. The impact of using other strategy (i.e., FIFO) is reported in Appendix D.

### Agent Performance (RQ1)

To evaluate the impact of using AIOS on agent performance in standard benchmarks, we adopt four agent benchmarks, i.e., HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021a) , MINT (the code subset) (Wang et al., 2023b) , GAIA (Mialon et al., 2023) and SWE-Bench-Lite (Jimenez et al., 2024) to run agents without and with AIOS, respectively. We use the success rate (SR%) as the metric, consistent with the original benchmarks and use GPT-4o-mini as the LLM core to run all the agents. We set the temperature as 1.0 for GPT-4o-mini in all experiments. Detailed descriptions of the benchmark setups and configurations can be found in Appendix C. As shown in Table 1 , incorporating AIOS consistently maintains agent performance across standard benchmarks. In some cases, AIOS can also contribute to agent performance improvements. For example, in code generation benchmarks such as MINT, HumanEval, and SWE-Bench-Lite, AIOS boosts agent performance by prompt enhancement, which embeds the system prompts with more structural input and output within the LLM wrapper. These enhanced prompts provide the LLM with additional context and structural guidance for response generation. In tool calling benchmarks like GAIA, agent performance is even boosted by two following mechanisms: pre-execution parameter validation via structural regex to check the format of tool calls before execution, and (2) conflict resolution hashmaps to mitigate concurrent access issues.

### Efficiency Analysis (RQ2)

In our efficiency experiments, we evaluate system performance using two key metrics: throughput and latency. Throughput is measured by counting the number of AIOS system calls executed per second, indicating the system's capacity to handle multiple requests in parallel. Latency, on the other hand, is measured as the average waiting time experienced by agents, from the moment a query is submitted to the completion of the response, reflecting the system's responsiveness. To ensure a controlled and consistent testing environment, we conduct these evaluations using the two open-source models, Llama-3.1-8b and Mistral-7b, both hosted locally. Hosting these models locally reduces potential variability in LLM API response times due to network-related latency issues. As shown in Figure 6a and Figure 7a , the results demonstrate that AIOS achieves significantly higher throughput across different agent frameworks, to a 2.1× increase in throughput when using Reflexion-based agents on Llama-3.1-8b. This improvement is attributed to the scheduling employed in the AIOS kernel, which prevents unnecessary trial-and-error attempts by avoiding prompts that cannot be loaded onto the GPU for execution. In terms of latency, as illustrated in Figure 6b and Figure 7b , the average waiting time for agents is also substantially reduced. This reduction highlights the efficiency of AIOS in serving LLM-based agents.

### Scalability Analysis (RQ3)

We evaluated AIOS scalability by incrementally increasing active agents from 250 to 2000, using Llama-3.1-8b and Mistral-7b models on the HumanEval benchmark. We duplicated HumanEval's 164 samples to match agent counts, enabling large-scale concurrent execution. As demonstrated in Figure 8 , AIOS maintains approximately linear relationships between both overall execution time and average agent waiting time relative to agent count. This indicates that AIOS can efficiently handle workload even under increasing demand. In contrast, the gap of execution and waiting times between without AIOS and using AIOS widens as agent counts increase. This growing differential underscores AIOS's scalability under high concurrent workloads.

### Related Work

The evolution of operating systems (OS) has progressed from rudimentary to sophisticated interactive systems. This evolution transitioned from basic batch processing (IBM, 2010) to advanced process management including time-sharing (Ritchie & Thompson, 1974) and multi-tasking (Hoare, 1974; Engler et al., 1995) , enabling complex task handling. Development advanced toward modular architecture with specialized components for process scheduling (Liu & Layland, 1973; Dijkstra, 2002) , memory management (Denning, 1968; Daley & Dennis, 1968) , and filesystem operations (Rosenblum & Ousterhout, 1992; McKusick et al., 1984) , improving system efficiency. The introduction of graphical user interfaces (GUIs) in Macintosh, Windows, and GNOME enhanced user interaction. Currently, AI models, particularly LLMs, are migrating from application to system layers, providing standardized services across applications.

Large Language Model Agents are used to solve complex planning and reasoning tasks (Xie et al., 2024; Ge et al., 2023a) . Single agents engage with either digital environment or physical environment, which may invoke APIs (Ge et al., 2023a; Schick et al., 2023; Yao & Narasimhan, 2023; Parisi et al., 2022; Tang et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2024) , browse websites (Nakano et al., 2022; Deng et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2024) , or execute codes (Zhang et al., 2023; Yang et al.) , while agents in the physical environment may manipulate objects (Brohan et al., 2023; Fan et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023a) , carry out lab experiments (Boiko et al., 2023; Bran et al., 2023) , or make actionable decisions (Huang et al., 2022; Xiang et al., 2023) . LLM-based multi-agent systems (MAS) leverage the interaction among multiple agents for problem solving. The relationship among the multiple agents could be cooperative (Wang et al., 2023c; Mandi et al., 2023) , competitive (Chan et al., 2023; Du et al., 2023) , or a mixture of cooperation and competition (Ge et al., 2023b) . In cooperative multi-agent systems, each agent takes and assesses the information provided by other agents, thereby working together to solve complex tasks, such as role playing (Li et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2023; Zhu et al., 2023) , social simulation (Park et al., 2023) and software development (Hong et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023; Josifoski et al., 2023) .

### Conclusion and Future Work

This paper introduces AIOS, an architecture serving LLM-based agents through an innovative kernel that isolates resources and LLM services from agent applications. The complementary AIOS SDK enables agent applications to leverage kernel functionalities efficiently. Experimental validation confirms AIOS maintains or enhances agent performance on standard benchmarks while significantly accelerating execution time, improving system throughput, and demonstrating scalability with increasing concurrent agent loads.

We envision this work catalyzing future innovations that refine and expand the architecture to address evolving requirements for developing and deploying LLM-based agents.

## APPENDIX

This appendix contains additional details for this paper. The appendix is organized as: Section §A provides AIOS Kernel Implementation Details. Section §B reports more about AIOS SDK. Section §C reports more Details of Agent Benchmarks. Section §D shows more Additional Experimental Results. Section §E analyzes Discussion.

### AIOS System Call

The modules in AIOS achieve their functionalities by invoking system calls. Table 2 shows a more comprehensive list of system calls correspondent to different modules and present the arguments for invoking these system calls.

### LLM Core

AIOS implements a unified interface through the LLMAdapter class, which provides a consistent function interface for integrating LLM instances from various backends. This architecture allows for seamless interaction with different LLM providers while maintaining a standardized API. Table 3 presents the supported LLM backends and their respective functionalities within the AIOS framework.

✓ ✓ Anthropic (cloud) ✓ ✓ Google (cloud) ✓ ✓ Groq (cloud) ✓ ✓ Bedrock (cloud) ✓ ✓ Huggingface (local) ✓ ✓ vllm (local) ✓ ✓ Ollama (local) ✓ ✓ class

### Memory Manager

The memory manager provides RAM-based memory operations for the AIOS system, handling transient session-specific data that clears when agent sessions end. Built on the BaseMemoryManager class, it offers comprehensive memory access through atomic operations, automatic metadata synchronization, and thread-safe access patterns. The system efficiently processes memory through a complete suite of CRUD operations and advanced retrieval mechanisms, functioning similarly to pointer management in low-level programming while ensuring data integrity during concurrent operations.

### Storage Manager

The Storage Manager orchestrates persistent data operations in AIOS, combining traditional file storage with vector database capabilities. It implements versioned file management, thread-safe access through file-specific locks, and semantic search functionality. The storage manager provides file operations including file management, semantic file retrieval, version control with rollback capabilities, and file sharing. Function interfaces are shown as below.

### Tool Manager

The tool manager module is responsible for loading tools executing tools with tool conflict prevention mechanisms. Implementation details are shown below.

### Access Manager

The access manager provides two key functions: First is to check access when agents attempt to access other agents' resources. Second is to request user permission before agents execute irreversible actions such as deletion of files. Function interfaces are shown below.

### Module Hooks

To effectively separate the interface of calling the AIOS kernel modules from the implementation details, we employ a hook mechanism to initialize modules and export the necessary call interfaces. Here are the hooks we use for initializing modules.

## B AIOS SDK

The AIOS SDK provides a structured interface between user device applications and the AIOS kernel through different functional modules. All queries from these modules are ultimately channeled through a central send request() function in the SDK, which then communicates with the AIOS kernel via HTTP requests (either to localhost or a remote URL). From the agent developer's perspective, their agents are essentially composed of code snippets which could include agent logic and resource-related commands for LLM, memory, storage and tool that interact with their respective modules through the SDK apis. This creates a clean separation between the application logic and request of kernel resources.

### Query and Response

The AIOS SDK defines a robust query-response architecture that enables seamless communication between agent applications and the AIOS kernel. This framework is built on two foundational data structures: Query and Response, which facilitate structured data exchange across the system. Query Structure. The Query class serves as the abstract base for all input requests, establishing a consistent interface for agent interactions with the kernel. It branches into four specialized implementations:

• LLMQuery: Facilitates natural language interactions with configurable parameters for temperature, token limits, and various action types including chat, JSON output, tool calls, and file operations.

• MemoryQuery: Handles transient data operations including adding, retrieving, updating, and removing memories with specialized support for agentic memory management.

• StorageQuery: Manages persistent storage operations through parameterized requests for file and directory manipulation.

• ToolQuery: Enables access to external capabilities through structured tool calls, extending the system's functionality.

### Response Structure

The Response class provides a complementary structure for standardized outputs from the AIOS kernel. Each response type corresponds to its query counterpart:

• LLMResponse: Returns generated text, tool call outcomes, completion status, and error information from language model operations.

• MemoryResponse: Delivers memory content, metadata, search results, and operation status for memory management functions. • StorageResponse: Provides operation outcomes, completion status, and error details for storage-related activities.

• ToolResponse: Returns tool execution results, completion status, and error information from external tool operations.

### AIOS SDK APIs

AIOS SDK also provides multiple API functions that are constructed using the Query and Response data structure and send request() functions. Avaiable APIs are shown in Table 4 .

### Supported Tools

As is illustrated in Table 5 , AIOS SDK integrates diverse computational tools to address a wide spectrum of information processing tasks. The SDK incorporates 17 native tools spanning multiple modalities and functionalities, enabling sophisticated interaction patterns across text, image, and audio domains. These tools can be categorized into three primary sources: established technology providers (Google, Bing, WolframAlpha), specialized API hubs (Rapid API Hub), and advanced AI model providers (Huggingface).

The toolkit's architecture demonstrates particular strength in text-based operations, with 12 tools supporting text input or output modalities. This includes fundamental information retrieval services (Arxiv, BingSearch, Wikipedia), specialized analytical tools (Currency-Converter, MoonPhaseSearch), and domain-specific applications (ImdbRank, TripAdvisor). Furthermore, the SDK exhibits robust cross-modal capabilities through tools like Visu-alQuestionAnswering (image-text integration), TextToAudio (text-to-speech synthesis), and VoiceActivityRecognition (speech-to-text conversion).

### Agent Examples

Here we provide examples of agents developed by leveraging AIOS SDK.

Travel Agent: The travel agent is designed for trip planning, including searching for flights, accommodations, and local activities.

### Rec Agent

The recommendation agent is designed for suggesting movies and TV series.

Math Agent: This agent is designed to solve equations, perform calculations, and provide step-by-step explanations for different math problems. Creation Agent: The creation agent is tailored for content generation tasks, such as writing, graphic design, or even video editing.

### Academic Agent

The academic agent is designed to support research and learning, such as literature reviews and provide explanations on complex academic topics.

### TravelAgent Profile

Description: You are an expert in planning and managing travel itineraries.

### Workflow

1. Identify the destination and search for hotel locations using the hotel location search tool. 2. Based on the hotel locations, find suitable hotels using the hotel search tool, and select the best one. 3. Get detailed information about the selected hotel using the get hotel details tool. 4. Search for the nearest airport to the origin using the airport search tool. 5. Search for the nearest airport to the destination using the airport search tool. 6. Find available flights to the destination airport using the flight search tool using the correct date. 7. Search for restaurant locations near destination using the restaurant location search tool. 8. Based on the restaurant locations, find suitable restaurants using the restaurant search tool. 9. Get detailed information about the selected restaurants using the get restaurant details tool. 10. Gather additional relevant information about the destination the user is visiting using the wikipedia tool. 11. Integrate the information gathered from the previous steps to provide a comprehensive travel plan. Available tools:

1. TripAdvisor 2. Wikipedia Example of task inputs: I want to take a trip to Paris, France from July 4th to July 10th, 2024, and I am traveling from New York City. Help me plan this trip.

### Support of Agent Frameworks

The core idea to adapt agents built by existing agent frameworks for AIOS is to identify the core functions that will interact with system resources and change that with functions in our native adapters. In this section, we illustrate the crucial adaptation function that needs to be changed to run agents built by other agent frameworks on AIOS.

ReAct (Yao et al., 2023) . The ReAct framework integrates reasoning and action steps in language models, allowing them to generate intermediate reasoning traces alongside actionable steps for complex task completion. This dual approach helps models not only plan and track their thought process but also interact with external tools, improving performance on tasks like question answering, game environments, and decision-making problems that require multi-step reasoning and adaptability. By alternating between reasoning and action, ReAct reduces errors from solely predictive responses and enables more accurate, contextually aware task completion.

Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) . The Reflexion framework enhances language agents with a feedback-driven mechanism, allowing them to learn from mistakes and adapt behavior through self-reflective feedback loops. By leveraging verbal reinforcement learning, agents assess and adjust their actions, which improves performance on complex tasks through iterative learning. This approach makes language agents more resilient and adaptive, enabling them to handle tasks with evolving requirements and uncertainty.

Autogen (Wu et al., 2023) . AutoGen introduces a framework that leverages multiple language model agents with distinct roles (such as Planner, Executor, and Reflector) to collaboratively solve complex tasks through structured, goal-oriented conversations. By enabling agents to communicate and share intermediate results, AutoGen coordinates multi-step processes like data analysis, decision-making, and iterative problem-solving, significantly enhancing efficiency and accuracy beyond a single model's capabilities. This approach empowers next-generation applications, allowing LLMs to tackle dynamic workflows, adapt to task-specific nuances, and achieve higher performance in real-world scenarios. Below is the code of adapting Autogen for AIOS. Due to ongoing refactoring work by the Autogen team, only Autogen-0.2 (the latest stable version) is supported. @add_framework_adapter ( " AutoGen ˜0.2 " ) def prepare_autogen_0_2 () : 1 2 3 4 0.7 0.3

""" Replace OpenAIWrapper and ConversableAgent methods with aios 's implementation . Open-Interpreter (Lucas, 2024) . Open Interpreter is an open-source framework that enables users to interact with LLMs through a ChatGPT-like interface to interpret and execute complex instructions across programming languages directly in the terminal. It supports both locally-hosted and cloud-based LLMs, allowing for streamlined code execution and debugging in natural language. By translating natural language instructions into executable code, Open Interpreter offers an intuitive environment that not only simplifies development workflows but also facilitates learning by providing detailed explanations and interactive support for various coding challenges, making it suitable for developers at all skill levels. Below is the core function to be adapted for Open-Interpreter.

### HumanEval

The authors (Chen et al., 2021b) foot_0 introduced HumanEval, a benchmark dataset comprising 164 handwritten programming problems for evaluating functional correctness of code generation models. Each problem consists of a function signature, docstring, implementation body, and comprehensive test suite, with an average of 7.7 test cases per problem. The hand-written nature of these problems is crucial, given that modern language models are typically trained on large portions of GitHub code containing existing solutions to programming challenges and contest problems. HumanEval is designed to assess multiple aspects of code generation capability: natural language comprehension, logical reasoning, algorithmic thinking, and mathematical operations. Through this publicly available benchmark, researchers can conduct rigorous and standardized evaluations of code generation models.

### MINT

MINT (Wang et al., 2023b) foot_1 introduced a benchmark to evaluate LLMs' ability to solve challenge tasks through multi-turn interactions. The benchmark focuses on code generation, decision making, and reasoning tasks that require LLMs to utilize tools and incorporate natural language feedback. MINT was constructed by curating multiple single-turn datasets, reducing an original collection of 29,307 instances to 586 carefully selected examples. The benchmark uses success rate (SR) as its primary evaluation metric, measuring the percentage of successfully completed tasks. For a given interaction limit k ranging 5, each LLM is allowed up to k turns of interaction, with performance measured as SR k . In our experiments, we set k = 5 and focus exclusively on MINT's code generation subset.

### GAIA

General AI Assistant (GAIA) (Mialon et al., 2023) foot_2 is a benchmark designed to represent a significant milestone in AI research by evaluating fundamental capabilities essential for general intelligence. Unlike traditional benchmarks that focus on specialized professional knowledge, GAIA emphasizes everyday tasks that require core abilities including logical reasoning, multi-modal processing, web navigation, and effective tool utilization. GAIA comprises 466 questions that evaluate AI assistants across multiple capabilities including reasoning, multi-modal understanding, coding, and tool usage (particularly web browsing), with tasks involving various data formats like PDFs, spreadsheets, images, videos, and audio. The benchmark organizes questions into three difficulty levels based on the number of required steps and tools: Level 1 requires minimal tool usage (≤ 5 steps), Level 2 demands multiple tools and 5-10 steps, while Level 3 tests advanced general assistance capabilities through complex, multi-step sequences requiring diverse tool combinations. Additionally, while web browsing is central to GAIA, the benchmark deliberately excludes complex web interactions like file uploads or posting comments, leaving such evaluations for future research.

### Efficiency analysis

We also report the throughput and latency of running agents on other three benchmarks on Llama-3.1-8b and Mistral-7b compared between using AIOS and without using AIOS.

The results are shown in Figure 10 and Figure 11 , Figure 12 and Figure 13 , Figure 14 and Figure 15 , respectively.

### Impact of Different Scheduling Strategies

To further analyze the impact of different scheduling strategies on system efficiency, we conduct an ablation study using agents built with ReAct on the HumanEval benchmark with the Llama-3.1-8b model. We test three strategies: without AIOS, FIFO, and Round Robin (RR), and measure the overall execution time and agent waiting time (average and p90).

As shown in Table 6 , the FIFO strategy achieves the shortest overall execution time compared to the other strategies. RR comes second in terms of overall execution and average agent waiting time, as its context switching introduces additional overhead. However, RR performs better on the p90 metric (i.e., the value below which 90% of waiting times fall) due to its fairer scheduling approach, which reduces the likelihood of later tasks having longer waiting time, which can typically occur in FIFO.

### Correctness of context switch

To assess the correctness of the context switch supported by the context manager, we employ the BLEU score (Papineni et al., 2002) and BERT score (Zhang et al., 2019) to measure text similarity. The similarity is calculated against the final outputs generated for the same agent under the same conditions, only varying with context switch enabled and disabled. As demonstrated in Table 7 , both BLEU and BERT scores achieve a value of 1.0. The suggests that the context switch does not introduce discrepancies in output quality, suggesting the reliability of the AIOS.

### Ethical Consideration

In this section, we discuss both potential positive and negative societal impacts of the work. The potential positive societal impacts include: 1) Enhanced efficiency and productivity: AIOS can automate routine tasks, achieve more efficient operations, optimize resource allocation, and reduce bottlenecks, leading to better service and improved efficiency for agent developers; 2) Improved user experience: with better context, memory, and storage management, AIOS can offer more personalized and responsive interactions, enhancing user satisfaction across various applications; 3) Innovation ecosystem: the creation of AIOS could foster a vibrant ecosystem of agent developers and researchers, driving innovation in AI technologies and applications.

The potential negative societal impacts include: 1) Privacy concerns: the integration of LLMs into operating systems may raise privacy concerns, as AI models such as LLMs may require access to personal data to provide effective services; 2) Security risks: as AI systems become more integral to critical infrastructure, they could become targets for cyberattacks, potentially compromising sensitive data and operations; 3) System failures: the failure of integrated systems could have widespread consequences, affecting multiple sectors simultaneously and causing disruptions.

Balancing the impacts: To maximize the positive impacts and mitigate the negative ones, it is crucial to adopt a balanced approach to the development and deployment of AIOS, such as 1) Rules and standards: Implementing responsible development rules and standards to ensure data privacy, security, and ethical use of AI; 2) Robust design: implementing robust system design, regular maintenance, comprehensive testing, continuous monitoring, backup By addressing these considerations, society can harness the potential of AIOS while mitigating its risks, leading to a more equitable and prosperous future.

### Future Directions

With AIOS as a foundation, there are many directions for future research to pursue. This section outlines potential areas of study that expand upon AIOS.

Semantic Scheduling Algorithms. The scheduling function of AIOS lays the groundwork for the development of more advanced algorithms. Future research could focus on algorithms that perform dependency analysis among agent requests, optimizing the allocation of computational resources. Additionally, some of the tool resources are locally deployed models, which can also be incorporated into the scheduling paradigm. This includes the management of tool status and snapshots, suggesting a move towards a unified scheduling framework that encompasses both agents and their tools.

### Efficiency of Context Management

More efficient mechanisms can be devised to assist context management. For example, the pursuit of time-efficient context management techniques could significantly augment user experience by expediting the processes of context snapshotting and restoration. Also, context compression techniques can also be leveraged prior to snapshotting, which can yield a more space-efficient solution.

Optimization of Memory and Storage Architecture. In the context of agent collaboration and communication, the future design of memory and storage systems can adopt a shared approach, enabling the sharing of memory and storage between agents. Such an architecture would enable agents to access a communal pool of memory and storage, thereby improving the agents' decision-making ability since one agent can benefit from other agents' memory or storage. Moreover, future work can explore hierarchical storage solutions, designed to optimize data retrieval and storage efficiency. This could involve prioritizing quicker access and reduced storage allocation for frequently accessed data, and vice versa for less frequently accessed information.

Photo ID Upload

Figure 4: Illustration of the logits-based context snapshot and restoration process. We use beam search algorithm where beam width is set to 1 as an example.

I need to buy a new phone. Looking for something with a great camera, at least 128GB storage, and 5G compatible. Budget is around $800.Agent: Understood, I'll call the google search of related items for you.

as the closed-source API, and use two open-source LLMs, i.e., Llama-3.1-8b (Dubey et al., 2024) and Mistral-7b (Jiang et al., 2023), as the LLM core, respectively, during the experiments. The open-source models are both instruction-tuned versions and we use float16 precision.

latency. Lower is better.

Figure 6: Efficiency analysis on different agent frameworks evaluated on the Llama-3.1-8b model on the HumanEval benchmark.

Figure 7: Efficiency analysis on different agent frameworks evaluated on the Mistral-7b model on the HumanEval benchmark.

Figure 8: Overall execution time and average agent waiting time when agent number increases from 250 to 2000.

| List , # either a response message of a string or a list of tool calls finished : bool , tools : Optional [ List ] = None , model : Union [ str , OpenAI , HfLocalBackend ] = None , message_return_type : Optional [ str ] = None ) -> LLMResponse : # Process the model 's response into the appropriate format . pass

a file to a previous version by index or timestamp . pass def generate_share_link ( self , file_path : str ) -> str : # Generate a publicly accessible link for sharing a file . pass def sto_share ( self , file_path : str , collection_name : str = None ) -> dict : # Share a file by generating a public access link with proper lock management . pass

Figure9: Illustration of how agent applications leverage the AIOS SDK to send queries to the AIOS Kernel. For simplicity, queries sent directly to the OS kernel are omitted.

operate_file " ] = Field ( default = " chat " ) temperature : float = Field ( default =1.0) max_new_tokens : int = Field ( default =1000) message_return_type : Literal [ " text " , " json " ] = Field ( default = " text " ) response_format : Optional [ Dict [ str , Any ]] = Field ( default = None )

Normalized latency. Lower is better.

Figure 10: Efficiency analysis on different agent frameworks evaluated on the Llama-3.1-8b model on the MINT benchmark.

latency. Lower is better.

Figure 11: Efficiency analysis on different agent frameworks evaluated on the Mistral-7b model on the MINT benchmark.

Figure12: Efficiency analysis on different agent frameworks evaluated on the Llama-3.1-8b model on the GAIA benchmark.

Correctness of context switch (text-based and logits-based), which checks the similarity between the generated final outputs with context switch enabled and disabled. latency. Lower is better.

Figure 13: Efficiency analysis on different agent frameworks evaluated on the Mistral-7b model on the GAIA benchmark.

Figure 14: Efficiency analysis on different agent frameworks evaluated on the Llama-3.1-8b model on the SWE-Bench-Lite benchmark.

AIOS modules and their correspondent system calls. Module | System Call LLM Core | execute llm syscall, get model response, process model response Scheduler | execute syscall, start, stop Context Manager | generate response with interruption, load context, clear context Memory Manager execute memory syscall, add memory, remove memory update memory, retrieve memory Storage Manager | execute storage syscall, sto create file, sto create directory sto mount, sto write, sto retrieve, sto rollback, sto share Tool Manager | execute tool syscall, load tool instance Access Manager | add privilege, check access, ask permission

Adapted LLM backends in AIOS and supported features. Backend | Supported Features in AIOS Structured Output Function Calling OpenAI (cloud)

AIOS implements a flexible scheduler architecture through the BaseScheduler class, which serves as the foundation for various scheduling strategies. By designing an extensible inheritance model, specialized schedulers (implementing algorithms such as FIFO, Round Robin, and priority-based scheduling) can be derived from this base class. This modular design ensures that new scheduling algorithms can be introduced without modifying existing implementations, thus maintaining strong isolation between different scheduling strategies and enhancing the overall system flexibility. SimpleContextManager implements an efficient mechanism for managing LLM generation contexts with time-aware interruption capabilities. This component enables preemptive multitasking by preserving LLM states across generation phases. When an LLM successfully begins token generation within its allocated time slice (evidenced by at least one decoded A.3 Scheduler class BaseScheduler : # Task scheduler implementation . def __init__ ( self , llm : LLMAdapter , memory_manager : MemoryManager , storage_manager : StorageManager , tool_manager : ToolManager , log_mode : str , get_llm_syscall : LLMRequestQueueGetMessage , get_memory_syscall : MemoryRequestQueueGetMessage , get_storage_syscall : StorageRequestQueueGetMessage , get_tool_syscall : ToolRequestQueueGetMessage , ) : # Initialize the Scheduler . pass def _execute_syscall ( self , syscall : Any , executor : Any , syscall_type : str """ ) -> class SimpleContextManager ( BaseContextManager ) : A

simple context manager for handling LLM context saving and loading . This class provides functionality to save the current state of an LLM generation , load previously saved states , and manage context for different processes . """ def __init__ ( self ) : # Initialize the SimpleContextManager with an empty context dictionary . pass def get_streaming_completion_response ( self , model_or_client : Union [ str , OpenAI ] , model_name : str , messages : List [ Dict [ str , str ]] , tools : Optional [ List [ Dict [ str , Any ]]] , temperature : float , max_tokens : int , response_format : Optional [ Dict [ str , Any ]] = None , stream : bool = True ) -> Any : # Get a completion response from either litellm or OpenAI client . pass def process_completion_streaming_response ( self , response : Any , initial_content : str , time_limit : float ) ->

Tuple [ str , bool ]: # Process a streaming response with time limit enforcement . pass def _is_huggingface_model ( self , model ) -> bool : # Check if the model is a HuggingFace model instance . pass def generate_with_time_limit_hf ( self , model , messages : List [ Dict [ str , str ]] , max_tokens : int , temperature : float , pid : int , time_limit : float ) ->

Tuple [ str , bool , Dict ]: # Generate text with a HuggingFace model with time limit enforcement . pass def generate_response_with_interruption ( self , model_name : str , model : Union [ str , OpenAI , Any ] , messages : List [ Dict [ str , str ]] , tools : Optional [ List [ Dict [ str , Any ]]] , message_return_type : str , temperature : float , max_tokens : int , pid : Union [ int , str ] , time_limit : float , response_format : Optional [ Dict [ str , Any ]] = None ) -> Tuple [ Any , bool ]: # Save the context of an LLM generation . This method handles different types of LLM models ( string -based , OpenAI client , or HuggingFace ) and different response types ( text , JSON , or tool calls ) . It manages streaming responses and enforces time limits . pass def load_context ( self , pid ) : # Load a previously saved context for a process . pass def clear_context ( self , pid ) : # Clear the saved context for a process . pass

class BaseMemoryManager : # This class provides the core functionality for memory operations in the AIOS system , including adding , removing , updating , and retrieving memories . It acts as a wrapper for memory access , similar to working with pointers in low -level languages . def __init__ ( self , log_mode ) : # Initialize the BaseMemoryManager . pass def _analyze_query_to_memory ( self , query : MemoryQuery ) -> ' MemoryNote ': # Convert a MemoryQuery to a MemoryNote object . pass def execute_memory_syscall ( self , memory_syscall ) : # Route a memory syscall to the appropriate method . pass def add_memory ( self , memory_note ) : # Add a memory note to the storage . pass def remove_memory ( self , memory_id ) : # Remove a memory note from storage . pass def update_memory ( self , memory_note ) : # Update an existing memory note . pass def get_memory ( self , memory_id : str ) -> ' MemoryNote ': # Retrieve a memory note by ID . pass def _retrieve_memory_raw ( self , memory_query : MemoryQuery ) : # Retrieve memories similar to the query content . pass def retrieve_memory ( self , memory_query : MemoryQuery ) : #

Retrieve memories similar to the query content . pass

AIOS SDK Module | APIs LLM Core llm chat, llm chat with json output, llm chat with tool call output llm call tool, llm operate file Memory | create memory, get memory, delete memory, update memory search memories Storage | mount, retrieve file, create file, create dir, write file, rollback file share file Tool | call tool

Tools supported by AIOS SDK, ordered by names in alphabet. Tool Name | Source | Type | Modality (Input → Output) Arxiv | Arxiv | API | Text → Text BingSearch | Bing | API | Text → Text CurrencyConverter | Rapid API Hub | API | Text → Text GooglePlace | Google | API | Image/Text → Text GoogleSearch | Google | API | Text → Image ImageCaption | Huggingface | Local Model/API | Text → Text ImdbRank | Rapid API Hub | API | Text → Text MoonPhaseSearch | Rapid API Hub | API | Text → Text Shazam | Rapid API Hub | API | Text → Text/Audio TextToAudio | Huggingface | Local Model/API | Text → Audio TextToImage | Huggingface | Local Model/API | Text → Image TripAdvisor | Rapid API Hub | API | Text → Text VisualQuestionAnswering | Huggingface | Local Model/API | Image & Text → Text VoiceActivityRecognition | Huggingface | Local Model/API | Audio → Text Wikipedia | Wikipedia | API | Text → Text WolframAlpha | WolframAlpha | API | Text → Text WordsAPI | Rapid API Hub | API | Text → Text

This function is used to adapt autogen 's API to aios 's API , and it is used internally by aios . """ # Replace OpenAIWrapper method OpenAIWrapper . __init__ = adapter_autogen_client_init OpenAIWrapper . create = adapter_client_create OpenAIWrapper . extract_text_or_completion_object = adapter_client_extract_text_or_completion_object # Replace agent method ConversableAgent . _print_received_message = _adapter_print_received_message ConversableAgent . _generate_oai_reply_from_client = _adapter_generate_oai_reply_from_client ConversableAgent . generate_tool_calls_reply = adapter_generate_tool_calls_reply ConversableAgent . execute_function = adapter_execute_function ConversableAgent . _a_execute_tool_call = _adapter_a_execute_tool_call ConversableAgent . update_tool_signature = adapter_update_tool_signature ConversableAgent . __init__ = adapter_autogen_agent_init

Impact of using different scheduling strategies, where NONE represents without using AIOS, FIFO and RR represent using AIOS with the two different scheduling strategies. All metrics are reported in seconds. Strategy Overall execution time | Agent waiting time Avg. | p90 None | 152.1 | 9.8 | 11.0 FIFO | 74.2 | 3.0 | 5.0 RR | 77.3 | 3.2 | 4.2 ReAct | Reflexion Agents/Agent Frameworks Autogen Open-Interpreter MetaGPT

## B AIOS SDK
### References

Josh Achiam Steven Adler Sandhini Agarwal Lama Ahmad Ilge Akkaya Florencia Leoni Aleman Diogo Almeida Janko Altenschmidt Sam Altman Shyamal Anadkat arXiv:2303.08774 2023 arXiv preprint Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al. Gpt-4 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.

Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling Stella Biderman Hailey Schoelkopf Quentin Gregory Anthony Herbie Bradley O' Kyle Eric Brien Mohammad Hallahan Shivanshu Aflah Khan Purohit Edward Usvsn Sai Prashanth Raff International Conference on Machine Learning PMLR 2023 Stella Biderman, Hailey Schoelkopf, Quentin Gregory Anthony, Herbie Bradley, Kyle O'Brien, Eric Hallahan, Mohammad Aflah Khan, Shivanshu Purohit, USVSN Sai Prashanth, Edward Raff, et al. Pythia: A suite for analyzing large language models across training and scaling. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2397-2430. PMLR, 2023.

Emergent autonomous scientific research capabilities of large language models A Daniil Robert Boiko Gabe Macknight Gomes arXiv:2304.05332 2023 arXiv preprint Daniil A Boiko, Robert MacKnight, and Gabe Gomes. Emergent autonomous scientific research capabilities of large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05332, 2023.

Chemcrow: Augmenting large-language models with chemistry tools Sam Andres M Bran Andrew D Cox Philippe White Schwaller arXiv:2304.05376 2023 arXiv preprint Andres M Bran, Sam Cox, Andrew D White, and Philippe Schwaller. Chemcrow: Aug- menting large-language models with chemistry tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05376, 2023.

Tropos: An agent-oriented software development methodology Paolo Bresciani Anna Perini Paolo Giorgini Fausto Giunchiglia John Mylopoulos Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 8 2004 Paolo Bresciani, Anna Perini, Paolo Giorgini, Fausto Giunchiglia, and John Mylopoulos. Tropos: An agent-oriented software development methodology. Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems, 8:203-236, 2004.

Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances Anthony Brohan Yevgen Chebotar Chelsea Finn Karol Hausman Alexander Herzog Daniel Ho Julian Ibarz Alex Irpan Eric Jang Ryan Julian Conference on robot learning PMLR 2023 Anthony Brohan, Yevgen Chebotar, Chelsea Finn, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Daniel Ho, Julian Ibarz, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Ryan Julian, et al. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in robotic affordances. In Conference on robot learning, pp. 287-318. PMLR, 2023.

Chateval: Towards better llm-based evaluators through multi-agent debate Chi-Min Chan Weize Chen Yusheng Su Jianxuan Yu Wei Xue Shanghang Zhang Jie Fu Zhiyuan Liu The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations 2023 Chi-Min Chan, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jianxuan Yu, Wei Xue, Shanghang Zhang, Jie Fu, and Zhiyuan Liu. Chateval: Towards better llm-based evaluators through multi-agent debate. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Evaluating large language models trained on code Mark Chen Jerry Tworek Heewoo Jun Qiming Yuan Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto Jared Kaplan Harri Edwards Yuri Burda Nicholas Joseph Greg Brockman Alex Ray Raul Puri Gretchen Krueger Michael Petrov Heidy Khlaaf Girish Sastry Pamela Mishkin Brooke Chan Scott Gray Nick Ryder Mikhail Pavlov Alethea Power Lukasz Kaiser Mohammad Bavarian Clemens Winter Philippe Tillet Felipe Petroski Such Dave Cummings Matthias Plappert Fotios Chantzis Elizabeth Barnes Ariel Herbert-Voss William Hebgen Guss Alex Nichol Alex Paino Nikolas Tezak Jie Tang Igor Babuschkin Suchir Balaji Shantanu Jain William Saunders Christopher Hesse Andrew N Carr Jan Leike Josh Achiam Vedant Misra Evan Morikawa Alec Radford Matthew Knight Miles Brundage Mira Murati Katie Mayer Peter Welinder Bob Mcgrew Dario Amodei Sam Mccandlish Ilya Sutskever Wojciech Zaremba 2021 Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, Alex Ray, Raul Puri, Gretchen Krueger, Michael Petrov, Heidy Khlaaf, Girish Sastry, Pamela Mishkin, Brooke Chan, Scott Gray, Nick Ryder, Mikhail Pavlov, Alethea Power, Lukasz Kaiser, Mo- hammad Bavarian, Clemens Winter, Philippe Tillet, Felipe Petroski Such, Dave Cummings, Matthias Plappert, Fotios Chantzis, Elizabeth Barnes, Ariel Herbert-Voss, William Hebgen Guss, Alex Nichol, Alex Paino, Nikolas Tezak, Jie Tang, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Shantanu Jain, William Saunders, Christopher Hesse, Andrew N. Carr, Jan Leike, Josh Achiam, Vedant Misra, Evan Morikawa, Alec Radford, Matthew Knight, Miles Brundage, Mira Murati, Katie Mayer, Peter Welinder, Bob McGrew, Dario Amodei, Sam McCandlish, Ilya Sutskever, and Wojciech Zaremba. Evaluating large language models trained on code. 2021a.

Evaluating large language models trained on code Mark Chen Jerry Tworek Heewoo Jun Qiming Yuan Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto Jared Kaplan Harri Edwards Yuri Burda Nicholas Joseph Greg Brockman arXiv:2107.03374 2021 arXiv preprint Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evalu- ating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021b.

Weize Chen Yusheng Su Jingwei Zuo Cheng Yang Chenfei Yuan Chen Qian Chi-Min Chan Yujia Qin Yaxi Lu Ruobing Xie arXiv:2308.10848 Agentverse: Facilitating multi-agent collaboration and exploring emergent behaviors in agents 2023 arXiv preprint Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Jingwei Zuo, Cheng Yang, Chenfei Yuan, Chen Qian, Chi-Min Chan, Yujia Qin, Yaxi Lu, Ruobing Xie, et al. Agentverse: Facilitating multi-agent col- laboration and exploring emergent behaviors in agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10848, 2023.

Scaling instructionfinetuned language models Chung Hyung Won Le Hou Shayne Longpre Barret Zoph Yi Tay William Fedus Yunxuan Li Xuezhi Wang Mostafa Dehghani Siddhartha Brahma arXiv:2210.11416 2022 arXiv preprint Hyung Won Chung, Le Hou, Shayne Longpre, Barret Zoph, Yi Tay, William Fedus, Yunxuan Li, Xuezhi Wang, Mostafa Dehghani, Siddhartha Brahma, et al. Scaling instruction- finetuned language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11416, 2022.

Virtual memory, processes, and sharing in multics C Robert Jack B Daley Dennis Communications of the ACM 11 5 1968 Robert C Daley and Jack B Dennis. Virtual memory, processes, and sharing in multics. Communications of the ACM, 11(5):306-312, 1968.

Mind2web: Towards a generalist agent for the web Xiang Deng Yu Gu Boyuan Zheng Shijie Chen Samuel Stevens Boshi Wang Huan Sun Yu Su Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 2023 Xiang Deng, Yu Gu, Boyuan Zheng, Shijie Chen, Samuel Stevens, Boshi Wang, Huan Sun, and Yu Su. Mind2web: Towards a generalist agent for the web. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.

The working set model for program behavior J Peter Denning Communications of the ACM 11 5 1968 Peter J Denning. The working set model for program behavior. Communications of the ACM, 11(5):323-333, 1968.

Cooperating sequential processes W Edsger Dijkstra The origin of concurrent programming: from semaphores to remote procedure calls Springer 2002 Edsger W Dijkstra. Cooperating sequential processes. In The origin of concurrent programming: from semaphores to remote procedure calls, pp. 65-138. Springer, 2002.

Palm-e: an embodied multimodal language model Danny Driess Fei Xia S M Mehdi Corey Sajjadi Aakanksha Lynch Brian Chowdhery Ayzaan Ichter Jonathan Wahid Quan Tompson Tianhe Vuong Yu Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning 2023 Danny Driess, Fei Xia, Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Corey Lynch, Aakanksha Chowdhery, Brian Ichter, Ayzaan Wahid, Jonathan Tompson, Quan Vuong, Tianhe Yu, et al. Palm-e: an embodied multimodal language model. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 8469-8488, 2023.

Improving factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate Yilun Du Shuang Li Antonio Torralba Joshua B Tenenbaum Igor Mordatch arXiv:2305.14325 2023 arXiv preprint Yilun Du, Shuang Li, Antonio Torralba, Joshua B Tenenbaum, and Igor Mordatch. Improving factuality and reasoning in language models through multiagent debate. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.14325, 2023.

Abhimanyu Dubey Abhinav Jauhri Abhinav Pandey Abhishek Kadian Ahmad Al-Dahle Aiesha Letman Akhil Mathur Alan Schelten Amy Yang Angela Fan arXiv:2407.21783 The llama 3 herd of models 2024 arXiv preprint Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, et al. The llama 3 herd of models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.

Exokernel: An operating system architecture for application-level resource management M Dawson R Engler James O' Frans Kaashoek Toole Jr ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review 29 5 1995 Dawson R Engler, M Frans Kaashoek, and James O'Toole Jr. Exokernel: An operating system architecture for application-level resource management. ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review, 29(5):251-266, 1995.

Minedojo: Building open-ended embodied agents with internet-scale knowledge Linxi Fan Guanzhi Wang Yunfan Jiang Ajay Mandlekar Yuncong Yang Haoyi Zhu Andrew Tang De-An Yuke Huang Anima Zhu Anandkumar Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 2022 Linxi Fan, Guanzhi Wang, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Yuncong Yang, Haoyi Zhu, Andrew Tang, De-An Huang, Yuke Zhu, and Anima Anandkumar. Minedojo: Build- ing open-ended embodied agents with internet-scale knowledge. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:18343-18362, 2022.

OpenAGI: When LLM Meets Domain Experts Yingqiang Ge Wenyue Hua Kai Mei Juntao Tan Shuyuan Xu Zelong Li Yongfeng Zhang Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 2023 Yingqiang Ge, Wenyue Hua, Kai Mei, Juntao Tan, Shuyuan Xu, Zelong Li, and Yongfeng Zhang. OpenAGI: When LLM Meets Domain Experts. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023a.

LLM as OS, Agents as Apps: Envisioning AIOS, Agents and the AIOS-Agent Ecosystem Yingqiang Ge Yujie Ren Wenyue Hua Shuyuan Xu Juntao Tan Yongfeng Zhang arXiv:2312.03815 2023 Yingqiang Ge, Yujie Ren, Wenyue Hua, Shuyuan Xu, Juntao Tan, and Yongfeng Zhang. LLM as OS, Agents as Apps: Envisioning AIOS, Agents and the AIOS-Agent Ecosystem. arXiv:2312.03815, 2023b.

Recommendation as language processing (rlp): A unified pretrain, personalized prompt & predict paradigm (p5) Shijie Geng Shuchang Liu Zuohui Fu Yingqiang Ge Yongfeng Zhang Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems the 16th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems 2022 Shijie Geng, Shuchang Liu, Zuohui Fu, Yingqiang Ge, and Yongfeng Zhang. Recommen- dation as language processing (rlp): A unified pretrain, personalized prompt & predict paradigm (p5). In Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Recommender Systems, pp. 299-315, 2022.

Reasoning with language model is planning with world model Shibo Hao Yi Gu Haodi Ma Joshua Hong Zhen Wang Daisy Wang Zhiting Hu Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing 2023 Shibo Hao, Yi Gu, Haodi Ma, Joshua Hong, Zhen Wang, Daisy Wang, and Zhiting Hu. Reasoning with language model is planning with world model. In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 8154-8173, 2023.

Monitors: An operating system structuring concept Charles Antony Richard Hoare Communications of the ACM 17 10 1974 Charles Antony Richard Hoare. Monitors: An operating system structuring concept. Com- munications of the ACM, 17(10):549-557, 1974.

Metagpt: Meta programming for multi-agent collaborative framework Sirui Hong Mingchen Zhuge Jonathan Chen Xiawu Zheng Yuheng Cheng Jinlin Wang Ceyao Zhang Zili Wang Steven Ka Shing Yau Zijuan Lin The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations 2023 Sirui Hong, Mingchen Zhuge, Jonathan Chen, Xiawu Zheng, Yuheng Cheng, Jinlin Wang, Ceyao Zhang, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, et al. Metagpt: Meta program- ming for multi-agent collaborative framework. In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Language models as zero-shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents Wenlong Huang Pieter Abbeel Deepak Pathak Igor Mordatch International Conference on Machine Learning PMLR 2022 Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot planners: Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 9118-9147. PMLR, 2022.

What is batch processing? z/OS Concepts 2010 Corporation IBM Corporation IBM. What is batch processing? z/OS Concepts, 2010.

A roadmap of agent research and development Katia Nicholas R Jennings Michael Sycara Wooldridge Autonomous agents and multi-agent systems 1 1998 Nicholas R Jennings, Katia Sycara, and Michael Wooldridge. A roadmap of agent research and development. Autonomous agents and multi-agent systems, 1:7-38, 1998.

Alexandre Albert Q Jiang Arthur Sablayrolles Chris Mensch Devendra Bamford Diego Singh Chaplot Florian De Las Casas Gianna Bressand Guillaume Lengyel Lucile Lample Saulnier arXiv:2310.06825 Mistral 7 2023 arXiv preprint Albert Q Jiang, Alexandre Sablayrolles, Arthur Mensch, Chris Bamford, Devendra Singh Chaplot, Diego de las Casas, Florian Bressand, Gianna Lengyel, Guillaume Lample, Lucile Saulnier, et al. Mistral 7b. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06825, 2023.

SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues Carlos E Jimenez John Yang Alexander Wettig Shunyu Yao Kexin Pei Ofir Press Karthik R Narasimhan The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations 2024 Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik R Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.

Flows: Building blocks of reasoning and collaborating ai Martin Josifoski Lars Klein Maxime Peyrard Yifei Li Saibo Geng Julian Paul Schnitzler Yuxing Yao Jiheng Wei Debjit Paul Robert West arXiv:2308.01285 2023 arXiv preprint Martin Josifoski, Lars Klein, Maxime Peyrard, Yifei Li, Saibo Geng, Julian Paul Schnitzler, Yuxing Yao, Jiheng Wei, Debjit Paul, and Robert West. Flows: Building blocks of reasoning and collaborating ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.01285, 2023.

Language models can solve computer tasks Geunwoo Kim Pierre Baldi Stephen Mcaleer Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 2023 Geunwoo Kim, Pierre Baldi, and Stephen McAleer. Language models can solve computer tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.

Large language models are zero-shot reasoners Takeshi Kojima Shane Shixiang Machel Gu Yutaka Reid Yusuke Matsuo Iwasawa Advances in neural information processing systems 35 2022 Takeshi Kojima, Shixiang Shane Gu, Machel Reid, Yutaka Matsuo, and Yusuke Iwasawa. Large language models are zero-shot reasoners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 35:22199-22213, 2022.

Agent memory and adaptation in multi-agent systems Kristina Lerman Aram Galstyan Proceedings of the second international joint conference on Autonomous agents and multiagent systems the second international joint conference on Autonomous agents and multiagent systems 2003 Kristina Lerman and Aram Galstyan. Agent memory and adaptation in multi-agent systems. In Proceedings of the second international joint conference on Autonomous agents and multiagent systems, pp. 797-803, 2003.

Camel: Communicative agents for "mind" exploration of large language model society Guohao Li Hasan Hammoud Hani Itani Dmitrii Khizbullin Bernard Ghanem Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 2023 Guohao Li, Hasan Hammoud, Hani Itani, Dmitrii Khizbullin, and Bernard Ghanem. Camel: Communicative agents for "mind" exploration of large language model society. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.

Scheduling algorithms for multiprogramming in a hard-real-time environment Chung Laung Liu James W Layland Journal of the ACM (JACM) 20 1 1973 Chung Laung Liu and James W Layland. Scheduling algorithms for multiprogramming in a hard-real-time environment. Journal of the ACM (JACM), 20(1):46-61, 1973.

Killian Lucas 2024 Open interpreter Killian Lucas. Open interpreter. https://github.com/OpenInterpreter/open-interpreter, 2024.

Roco: Dialectic multi-robot collaboration with large language models Zhao Mandi Shreeya Jain Shuran Song arXiv:2307.04738 2023 arXiv preprint Zhao Mandi, Shreeya Jain, and Shuran Song. Roco: Dialectic multi-robot collaboration with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04738, 2023.

A fast file system for unix William N Marshall K Mckusick Samuel J Joy Robert S Leffler Fabry ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS) 2 3 1984 Marshall K McKusick, William N Joy, Samuel J Leffler, and Robert S Fabry. A fast file system for unix. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS), 2(3):181-197, 1984.

Gaia: a benchmark for general ai assistants Grégoire Mialon Clémentine Fourrier Craig Swift Thomas Wolf Yann Lecun Thomas Scialom arXiv:2311.12983 2023 arXiv preprint Grégoire Mialon, Clémentine Fourrier, Craig Swift, Thomas Wolf, Yann LeCun, and Thomas Scialom. Gaia: a benchmark for general ai assistants. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12983, 2023.

Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback Reiichiro Nakano Jacob Hilton Suchir Balaji Jeff Wu Long Ouyang Christina Kim Christopher Hesse Shantanu Jain Vineet Kosaraju William Saunders Xu Jiang Karl Cobbe Tyna Eloundou Gretchen Krueger Kevin Button Matthew Knight Benjamin Chess John Schulman 2022 Reiichiro Nakano, Jacob Hilton, Suchir Balaji, Jeff Wu, Long Ouyang, Christina Kim, Christo- pher Hesse, Shantanu Jain, Vineet Kosaraju, William Saunders, Xu Jiang, Karl Cobbe, Tyna Eloundou, Gretchen Krueger, Kevin Button, Matthew Knight, Benjamin Chess, and John Schulman. Webgpt: Browser-assisted question-answering with human feedback, 2022.

Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program synthesis Erik Nijkamp Bo Pang Hiroaki Hayashi Lifu Tu Huan Wang Yingbo Zhou Silvio Savarese Caiming Xiong arXiv:2203.13474 2022 arXiv preprint Erik Nijkamp, Bo Pang, Hiroaki Hayashi, Lifu Tu, Huan Wang, Yingbo Zhou, Silvio Savarese, and Caiming Xiong. Codegen: An open large language model for code with multi-turn program synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13474, 2022.

Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback Long Ouyang Jeffrey Wu Xu Jiang Diogo Almeida Carroll Wainwright Pamela Mishkin Chong Zhang Sandhini Agarwal Katarina Slama Alex Ray Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 2022 Long Ouyang, Jeffrey Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, et al. Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:27730-27744, 2022.

Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems Charles Packer Vivian Fang G Shishir Kevin Patil Sarah Lin Joseph E Wooders Gonzalez arXiv:2310.08560 2023 arXiv preprint Charles Packer, Vivian Fang, Shishir G Patil, Kevin Lin, Sarah Wooders, and Joseph E Gonzalez. Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08560, 2023.

Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation Kishore Papineni Salim Roukos Todd Ward Wei-Jing Zhu Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics 2002 Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-Jing Zhu. Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pp. 311-318, 2002.

Talm: Tool augmented language models Aaron Parisi Yao Zhao Noah Fiedel arXiv:2205.12255 2022 arXiv preprint Aaron Parisi, Yao Zhao, and Noah Fiedel. Talm: Tool augmented language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.12255, 2022.

Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior Sung Joon Park O' Joseph Carrie Jun Brien Meredith Ringel Cai Percy Morris Michael S Liang Bernstein Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology 2023 Joon Sung Park, Joseph O'Brien, Carrie Jun Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S Bernstein. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pp. 1-22, 2023.

Communicative agents for software development Chen Qian Xin Cong Cheng Yang Weize Chen Yusheng Su Juyuan Xu Zhiyuan Liu Maosong Sun arXiv:2307.07924 2023 arXiv preprint Chen Qian, Xin Cong, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Juyuan Xu, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. Communicative agents for software development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07924, 2023.

Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world apis Yujia Qin Shihao Liang Yining Ye Kunlun Zhu Lan Yan Yaxi Lu Yankai Lin Xin Cong Xiangru Tang Bill Qian 2024 ICLR Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, et al. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world apis. ICLR, 2024.

The unix time-sharing system M Dennis Ken Ritchie Thompson Communications of the ACM 17 7 1974 Dennis M Ritchie and Ken Thompson. The unix time-sharing system. Communications of the ACM, 17(7):365-375, 1974.

The design and implementation of a logstructured file system Mendel Rosenblum John K Ousterhout ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS) 10 1 1992 Mendel Rosenblum and John K Ousterhout. The design and implementation of a log- structured file system. ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS), 10(1):26-52, 1992.

The programmer's assistant: Conversational interaction with a large language model for software development Fernando Steven I Ross Stephanie Martinez Michael Houde Justin D Muller Weisz Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces 2023 Steven I Ross, Fernando Martinez, Stephanie Houde, Michael Muller, and Justin D Weisz. The programmer's assistant: Conversational interaction with a large language model for software development. In Proceedings of the 28th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, pp. 491-514, 2023.

Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools Timo Schick Jane Dwivedi-Yu Roberto Dessì Roberta Raileanu Maria Lomeli Luke Zettlemoyer Nicola Cancedda Thomas Scialom arXiv:2302.04761 2023 arXiv preprint Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04761, 2023.

Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning Noah Shinn Federico Cassano Ashwin Gopinath Karthik Narasimhan Shunyu Yao Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 2023 Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2023.

Toolalpaca: Generalized tool learning for language models with 3000 simulated cases Qiaoyu Tang Ziliang Deng Hongyu Lin Xianpei Han Qiao Liang Le Sun arXiv:2306.05301 2023 arXiv preprint Qiaoyu Tang, Ziliang Deng, Hongyu Lin, Xianpei Han, Qiao Liang, and Le Sun. Toolalpaca: Generalized tool learning for language models with 3000 simulated cases. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05301, 2023.

Galactica: A large language model for science Ross Taylor Marcin Kardas Guillem Cucurull Thomas Scialom Anthony Hartshorn Elvis Saravia Andrew Poulton Viktor Kerkez Robert Stojnic arXiv:2211.09085 2022 arXiv preprint Ross Taylor, Marcin Kardas, Guillem Cucurull, Thomas Scialom, Anthony Hartshorn, Elvis Saravia, Andrew Poulton, Viktor Kerkez, and Robert Stojnic. Galactica: A large language model for science. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.09085, 2022.

Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models Gemini Team Rohan Anil Sebastian Borgeaud Yonghui Wu Jean-Baptiste Alayrac Jiahui Yu Radu Soricut Johan Schalkwyk Andrew M Dai Anja Hauth arXiv:2312.11805 2023 arXiv preprint Gemini Team, Rohan Anil, Sebastian Borgeaud, Yonghui Wu, Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jiahui Yu, Radu Soricut, Johan Schalkwyk, Andrew M Dai, Anja Hauth, et al. Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805, 2023.

Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models Hugo Touvron Thibaut Lavril Gautier Izacard Xavier Martinet Marie-Anne Lachaux Timothée Lacroix Baptiste Rozière Naman Goyal Eric Hambro Faisal Azhar arXiv:2302.13971 2023 arXiv preprint Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timothée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971, 2023a.

Hugo Touvron Louis Martin Kevin Stone Peter Albert Amjad Almahairi Yasmine Babaei Nikolay Bashlykov Soumya Batra Prajjwal Bhargava Shruti Bhosale arXiv:2307.09288 Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models 2023 arXiv preprint Hugo Touvron, Louis Martin, Kevin Stone, Peter Albert, Amjad Almahairi, Yasmine Babaei, Nikolay Bashlykov, Soumya Batra, Prajjwal Bhargava, Shruti Bhosale, et al. Llama 2: Open foundation and fine-tuned chat models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288, 2023b.

Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models Guanzhi Wang Yuqi Xie Yunfan Jiang Ajay Mandlekar Chaowei Xiao Yuke Zhu Linxi Fan Anima Anandkumar Intrinsically-Motivated and Open-Ended Learning Workshop@ NeurIPS2023 2023 Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. In Intrinsically-Motivated and Open-Ended Learning Workshop@ NeurIPS2023, 2023a.

Mint: Evaluating llms in multi-turn interaction with tools and language feedback Xingyao Wang Zihan Wang Jiateng Liu Yangyi Chen Lifan Yuan Hao Peng Heng Ji arXiv:2309.10691 2023 arXiv preprint Xingyao Wang, Zihan Wang, Jiateng Liu, Yangyi Chen, Lifan Yuan, Hao Peng, and Heng Ji. Mint: Evaluating llms in multi-turn interaction with tools and language feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.10691, 2023b.

Zhenhailong Wang Shaoguang Mao Wenshan Wu Tao Ge Furu Wei Heng Ji arXiv:2307.05300 Unleashing cognitive synergy in large language models: A task-solving agent through multi-persona self-collaboration 2023c 3 arXiv preprint Zhenhailong Wang, Shaoguang Mao, Wenshan Wu, Tao Ge, Furu Wei, and Heng Ji. Un- leashing cognitive synergy in large language models: A task-solving agent through multi-persona self-collaboration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05300, 1(2):3, 2023c.

Intelligent agents: Theory and practice Michael Wooldridge Nicholas R Jennings The knowledge engineering review 10 2 1995 Michael Wooldridge and Nicholas R Jennings. Intelligent agents: Theory and practice. The knowledge engineering review, 10(2):115-152, 1995.

Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation framework Qingyun Wu Gagan Bansal Jieyu Zhang Yiran Wu Shaokun Zhang Erkang Zhu Beibin Li Li Jiang Xiaoyun Zhang Chi Wang arXiv:2308.08155 2023 arXiv preprint Qingyun Wu, Gagan Bansal, Jieyu Zhang, Yiran Wu, Shaokun Zhang, Erkang Zhu, Beibin Li, Li Jiang, Xiaoyun Zhang, and Chi Wang. Autogen: Enabling next-gen llm applications via multi-agent conversation framework. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.08155, 2023.

Os-copilot: Towards generalist computer agents with self-improvement Zhiyong Wu Chengcheng Han Zichen Ding Zhenmin Weng Zhoumianze Liu Shunyu Yao Tao Yu Lingpeng Kong arXiv:2402.07456 2024 arXiv preprint Zhiyong Wu, Chengcheng Han, Zichen Ding, Zhenmin Weng, Zhoumianze Liu, Shunyu Yao, Tao Yu, and Lingpeng Kong. Os-copilot: Towards generalist computer agents with self-improvement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07456, 2024.

Language models meet world models: Embodied experiences enhance language models Jiannan Xiang Tianhua Tao Yi Gu Tianmin Shu Zirui Wang Zichao Yang Zhiting Hu Advances in neural information processing systems 36 2023 Jiannan Xiang, Tianhua Tao, Yi Gu, Tianmin Shu, Zirui Wang, Zichao Yang, and Zhiting Hu. Language models meet world models: Embodied experiences enhance language models. Advances in neural information processing systems, 36, 2023.

Travelplanner: A benchmark for real-world planning with language agents Jian Xie Kai Zhang Jiangjie Chen Tinghui Zhu Renze Lou Yuandong Tian Yanghua Xiao Yu Su arXiv:2402.01622 2024 arXiv preprint Jian Xie, Kai Zhang, Jiangjie Chen, Tinghui Zhu, Renze Lou, Yuandong Tian, Yanghua Xiao, and Yu Su. Travelplanner: A benchmark for real-world planning with language agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.01622, 2024.

Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering John Yang Carlos E Jimenez Alexander Wettig Kilian Lieret Shunyu Yao Karthik Narasimhan Ofir Press John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering.

Language agents in the digital world: Opportunities and risks Shunyu Yao Karthik Narasimhan 2023 princeton-nlp github.io Shunyu Yao and Karthik Narasimhan. Language agents in the digital world: Opportunities and risks. princeton-nlp.github.io, 2023.

ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models Shunyu Yao Jeffrey Zhao Dian Yu Nan Du Izhak Shafran Karthik Narasimhan Yuan Cao International Conference on Learning Representations 2023 Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Toolcoder: Teach code generation models to use apis with search tools Kechi Zhang Ge Li Jia Li Zhuo Li Zhi Jin arXiv:2305.04032 2023 arXiv preprint Kechi Zhang, Ge Li, Jia Li, Zhuo Li, and Zhi Jin. Toolcoder: Teach code generation models to use apis with search tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.04032, 2023.

Bertscore: Evaluating text generation with bert Tianyi Zhang Varsha Kishore Felix Wu Kilian Q Weinberger Yoav Artzi arXiv:1904.09675 2019 arXiv preprint Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. Bertscore: Evaluating text generation with bert. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09675, 2019.

A survey on the memory mechanism of large language model based agents Zeyu Zhang Xiaohe Bo Chen Ma Rui Li Xu Chen Quanyu Dai Jieming Zhu Zhenhua Dong Ji-Rong Wen arXiv:2404.13501 2024 arXiv preprint Zeyu Zhang, Xiaohe Bo, Chen Ma, Rui Li, Xu Chen, Quanyu Dai, Jieming Zhu, Zhenhua Dong, and Ji-Rong Wen. A survey on the memory mechanism of large language model based agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13501, 2024.

Ghost in the minecraft: Generally capable agents for open-world enviroments via large language models with text-based knowledge and memory Xizhou Zhu Yuntao Chen Chenxin Hao Tian Weijie Tao Chenyu Su Gao Yang Bin Huang Lewei Li Xiaogang Lu Wang arXiv:2305.17144 2023 arXiv preprint Xizhou Zhu, Yuntao Chen, Hao Tian, Chenxin Tao, Weijie Su, Chenyu Yang, Gao Huang, Bin Li, Lewei Lu, Xiaogang Wang, et al. Ghost in the minecraft: Generally capable agents for open-world enviroments via large language models with text-based knowledge and memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17144, 2023.