# Synthesizing Proxy Applications for MPI Programs

arXiv (Cornell University). Published: 2023-01-15. Preprint. 0 citations.

## Authors

- Jiyu Luo: h-index 11; 375 citations
- Tao Yan: h-index 14; 838 citations
- Qingguo Xu: h-index 11; 529 citations
- Jingwei Sun: h-index 14; 554 citations
- Guangzhong Sun: h-index 28; 6,479 citations

## Topics

- Software System Performance and Reliability
- Parallel Computing and Optimization Techniques
- Cloud Computing and Resource Management

## Funding

- National Natural Science Foundation of China

---

# Synthesizing Proxy Applications for MPI Programs

## Abstract

Proxy applications (proxy-apps) are basic tools for evaluating the performance of specific workloads on highperformance computing (HPC) systems. Since the development of high-fidelity proxy-apps, which exhibit similar performance characteristics as corresponding production applications, is laborintensive, synthetic proxy-apps are created as a useful supplement to manually developed proxy-apps. To thoroughly resemble performance characteristics of HPC applications represented by Message Passing Interface (MPI) programs, we propose Siesta, a novel framework to automatically synthesize proxyapps based on communication-computation traces. Given an MPI program, Siesta synthesizes parameterized code snippets to mimic computation behaviors in different execution periods, and combines the code snippets and MPI function records into an event trace. It then extracts program behavior patterns from the trace as grammars and finally transforms the grammars into a synthetic proxy-app. We evaluate the proposed methods on representative MPI programs with various environments. The results show that our synthetic proxy-apps can precisely approximate the performance characteristics of MPI programs.

## INTRODUCTION

Proxy applications (proxy-apps) are basic tools for evaluating high-performance computing (HPC) systems. They enable convenient system design space exploration without complicated library dependency [1] , [2] , [3] . They are also used for performance modeling and estimating [4] , [5] , [6] , and can play a role as benchmarks representing proprietary workloads [7] , [8] , [9] . However, developing HPC proxy-apps is costly [10] , [11] . To precisely portray the complicated interaction between HPC systems and applications, the development requires intensive efforts from both application domain (e.g., physics, chemistry) experts and HPC developers. As a result, proxy-apps have difficulty in following the evolution of realworld HPC applications [12] .

Synthetic proxy-apps are constructed to approximate the performance characteristics of given programs, without performing any useful computation. A typical process of generating synthetic proxy-apps mainly consists of two phases: recording program behaviors, and replaying the record. Related recording and replaying techniques have been originally proposed for deterministic debugging purposes [13] , but recent studies show that they are also effective for synthesizing proxy-apps [14] , [15] . Synthetic proxy-apps can leverage detailed performance profiling data and achieve promising * Corresponding author performance coverage in many cases [7] , [16] . Since synthetic proxy-apps are generated from automated processes, they can be updated frequently and keep up closely with extensive realworld applications. Besides, compared with general-purpose benchmarks, like SPEC CPU [17] , NPB [18] , HPCG [19] , synthetic proxy-apps can mimic any given applications, satisfying customized demand.

The major challenge in synthesizing proxy-apps is extracting HPC applications' behavior patterns from a large amount of trace data. For instance, tracing a single execution of LULESH [20] on less than 1,000 processors can produce hundreds of gigabytes of trace data [21] . Existing methods mainly focus on communication trace [12] , [6] , [9] , [22] , [23] , [21] , since communication events constitute the skeleton of an HPC application. Meanwhile, computation behaviors are often overlooked. Computation behaviors are more diverse and difficult to trace. As a compromise, they are usually recorded as time intervals and replayed by calling sleep functions or empty loops [12] , [6] , [9] , [22] , [21] . Besides, lossy compression is often used to further reduce the size of communication information, of which the original communication parameters and timing information are approximated by histogram [24] , [25] , [23] , [4] , clustering [26] , [27] , and stochastic process [12] , [28] , [21] . Due to the ignorance of computation details and the lossy representation of communication trace, current synthetic proxy-apps are difficult to comprehensively resemble the performance characteristics of HPC applications.

To address these issues, we propose Siesta, a novel framework to automatically synthesize proxy-apps for HPC applications. Since Message Passing Interface (MPI) is the leading programming standard for HPC, we focus on MPI programs in this study. In general, given an MPI program without source code, we trace the program's communication and computation events and then convert the trace to a certain programming language (e.g., C language) code. The generated code does not output meaningful results, but it mimics the communication and computation of the given MPI program and exhibits similar performance characteristics.

By extracting nested loops and SPMD (single program multiple data) patterns in the trace using a grammar-based compression method [29] , we can control the generated code within a reasonable file size. Although the size of the generated code is much less than the size of the trace, all communication events, namely MPI function calls and related parameters, are losslessly contained in the code. For computation events, we represent each of them by a combination of predefined code blocks. The combination is determined by solving a constrained quadratic optimization problem, and can accurately approximate the computation performance metrics of a certain execution period of the MPI program. Such a representation of computation event avoids elaborately profiling the program's computation behavior in instruction granularity that can involve large overhead and interference.

The main contributions of this study are summarized as follows:

• We propose a novel framework to automatically synthesize proxy-apps for MPI programs. The generated proxyapp can losslessly reproduce the target MPI program's communication behaviors and exhibit similar computation performance metrics.

• We design an effective approach to extract the structural pattern of the trace and reduce its size by grammar-based analysis. We further transform the compressed trace to executable code as the target proxy-app.

• We evaluate our work by representative MPI programs with various settings. The results show that the generated proxy-apps can precisely approximate the performance characteristics of given MPI programs. The structure of the remaining paper is as follows. Section II describes the implementation of the proposed proxy-app synthesis framework. Section III shows evaluation results of the proposed method on a series of problem settings. Section IV reviews existing studies related to MPI proxy-app synthesis, and makes a brief comparison between this study and theirs. In section V, we draw a conclusion for this study.

### Searching Computation Proxies

Extracting Behavior Patterns

### Proxy-App Synthesis

Tracing Computation Events Fig. 1 . Overview of proxy-app synthesis for MPI programs

### Overview

Figure 1 shows an overview of Siesta. It takes a binary MPI program as input and finally outputs a C language code as a proxy-app (we can also choose another programming language). The proxy-app's behavior does not accord with the semantics of the input program (e.g., using an algorithm to correctly solve a problem), but has similar performance characteristics.

In the workflow of proxy-app synthesis, first, we trace runtime information of communication and computation events. Second, according to recorded computation characteristics, we search combinations of some predefined code blocks as computation proxies to guide the replay of computation events. Third, we extract intra-process and inter-process behavior patterns from the trace and obtain a compressed representation of the trace. Finally, we transform the grammar to C language code as the output.

### Tracing Communication Events

Siesta currently supports most synchronous and asynchronous MPI calls, such as MPI Irecv, MPI Allreduce, etc., with the exception of one-sided communication (e.g., MPI Put). In addition, I/O trace and MPI-I/O are also not considered in this study. According to existing studies [30] , [25] , [9] , the process of I/O trace is similar to that of communication trace. We believe that the method proposed in this study can also be generalized to I/O trace via further engineering efforts.

To trace MPI calls, we use the MPI profiling interface (PMPI) to intercept MPI function calls. PMPI provides convenient interfaces to insert customized code before and after an MPI function. Our tracing tool is implemented based on mpiP [31] , leveraging its higher-level interfaces over PMPI. To capture detailed information for each MPI event, we customized mpiP's implementation of wrapper creations since mpiP only generates aggregated statistics based on all MPI events.

The communication trace we record contains the id of the process (also called rank), name, and parameter information of MPI function calls. For data buffers in some functions, like MPI Send and MPI Recv, we do not record the exact content in the buffer, since it is costly and unnecessary. Recording the data volume is sufficient to reproduce the performance of the MPI function call.

The values of some handles, like MPI Request and MPI Comm, are determined at runtime. Tracing the value change of these handles may prevent many events from being compressed since random values have high information entropy and are difficult to be compressed. Besides, to correctly replay the usage of MPI Request and MPI Comm, recording their exact values is unnecessary. Our solution is to maintain a pool of free numbers, starting from zero, for tracing these handles. Taking MPI Request as an example, every time a request needs to be used, an unused number is allocated from the pool to the request as its id. When functions such as MPI Wait are called, the MPI Request object used by MPI library is implicitly released, and then the corresponding number is returned to the request pool. The processing for MPI Comm is similar to MPI Request.

A process to reduce data redundancy of communication traces is using relative ranks. For point-to-point MPI communication functions, the target process is usually related to the process of the function itself. In other words, for different processes, although their communication target processes are different, the difference between the target process rank and its rank is fixed. Especially for mesh-based numerical algorithms in high-performance scientific computing, many processes communicate with their neighbors.

### Tracing Computation Events

Unlike the communication event, the computation event of an MPI program is not a well-defined conception. It is natural to regard an MPI function call as a communication event, while computation behaviors can be defined with many aspects and granularities. In this study, we regard all operations between two successive communication events (after the end of the former communication event and before the beginning of the latter communication event) as a computation event. This definition is based on two points. (1) Existing studies [12] , [6] , [9] , [22] , [23] , [21] , [4] prefer to use the interval between two communication events to indicate a portion of computation time cost. Our definition aligns with the convention. (2) We can leverage PMPI to trace such computation events, without source code and extra efforts to program slicing and instrumenting.

To represent communication and computation events with the same trace format, we assume a virtual MPI function that is called MPI Compute. Each computation event is a call of MPI Compute function. Rather than recording concrete operations in a computation event, which is time-consuming and space-consuming, we take a vector of performance metrics as its footprint. The parameters of MPI Compute record the performance metrics of the corresponding computation event, and replaying a call of MPI Compute is to execute a series of operations that exhibit similar performance as the parameters record. Hence tracing a computation event is to measure its performance metrics.

To obtain performance metrics, we combine our tracing tool with PAPI [32] to intercept MPI functions and read hardware performance counters at the same time. We select several typical performance metrics as an example, shown in Table I . More metrics can also be added with similar operations. Since the metrics from PAPI are noisy, it is unnecessary to store accurate counts. We set a threshold to cluster similar computation events into one event so that the number of unique calls of MPI Compute can be reduced.

### Searching Computation Proxies

To generate a compilable and executable proxy for a computation event, we need to infer its possible source code according to obtained performance metrics. There might be numerous possible codes that show similar performance metrics. To make a simplified approximation, we define the search space by linear combinations of some pre-designed code blocks that show diverse performance. Searching for an optimal combination with maximized performance similarity (namely minimized error) can be formulated as a constrained optimization problem. Generally, for a given computation event, we can obtain its n performance metrics t ∈ R n×1 . These metrics constitute the footprint of a computation event and can be used to measure the similarity of different computation events. Suppose there are m code blocks called block 1,2,...,m and we can use microbenchmarks to get the i-th metric of block j , called b i,j on a given HPC system. Let B = (b i,j ) n×m . Then we combine the m code blocks linearly to obtain a computation proxy. Suppose block j is repeated x j times and let x = (x 1 , x 2 , ..., x m ) ⊤ ∈ R m×1 . We will make a rounded approximation at the end because x must be positive integers. At this point, the original problem can be transformed into a constrained optimization problem as follows,

min x f (x) = ∥Bx -t∥ 2 , x i ≥ 0, i = 1, 2, ..., m (1)

Since the order of magnitude difference between different metrics may be large, we divide matrix B by rows and changed the difference of each metric to a relative error.

B = (b i,j ) n×m = (b 1 , b 2 , ..., b n ) ⊤ , b i ∈ R 1×m . (2)

The modified optimization problem is:

min x f (x) = n i=1 1 t 2 i (b i • x -t i ) 2 , x i ≥ 0, i = 1, 2, ..., m (3)

We select eight performance metrics as an example, detailed in Table I , to represent various aspects of a computation event's behaviors. By comparing these metrics we can assess the similarity between the computation event and our synthesized computation proxy. These metrics are commonly employed in performance evaluation, and we can expect that the code synthesized accordingly will have similar characteristics to the computation event.

We have developed a series of code blocks, illustrated in Figure 2 , to approximate various aspects of application behaviors, including computation, branching, and memory access. These blocks exhibit distinct performance characteristics, enabling effective manipulation of specific behaviors by adjusting the repetition count of each block. Using Equation optimal combination with maximized performance similarity (namely minimized error) can be formulated as a constrained optimization problem. Generally, for a given computation event, we can obtain its n performance metrics t ∈ R n× 1. These metrics constitute the footprint of a computation event and can be used to measure the similarity of different computation events. Suppose there are m code blocks called block1,2,...,m and we can use micro benchmarks to get the i-th metric of blockj , called bi,j on a given HPC system. Let B = (bi,j )n× m. Then we combine the m code blocks linearly to obtain a computation proxy. Suppose blockj is repeated xj times and let x = (x1, x2, ..., xm)⊤ ∈R m× 1. We will make a rounded approximation at the end because x must be positive integers. At this point, the original problem can be transformed into a constrained optimization problem as follows,

### Extracting Intra-process Behavior Patterns

HPC applications conduct iterative communications and computations to solve problems. Consequently, their traces contain repetitive data. We adopt a grammar-based method [29] to extract hierarchical and periodic patterns of nested loops in a trace and compactly represent the patterns with small space consumption.

For representing symbolic sequences, context-free grammars have been widely used in text compression, natural language processing, music processing, and macromolecular sequence modeling [33] . Context-free grammar provides a simple and mathematically precise mechanism for describing the methods by which phrases in language are built from smaller blocks, capturing the block structure of sentences in a natural way. In a trace, this block structure can be used to describe loop sections or recursive content.

Before the extraction, events are stored in a hash table . A key in the hash table is a string that records the information of a unique event, and the corresponding value is an event id. Then the trace is represented by a sequence of ids. Each process of the MPI program has its own trace and table, so the extraction consists of two phases: extracting intra-process patterns of each process respectively, and further extracting inter-process across all processes.

Specifically, we adopt Nevill's Sequitur algorithm [29] to convert a trace to a context-free grammar with linear worstcase time and space complexity. It only needs to scan the trace once to complete the construction of the context-free grammar. The algorithm starts with an initial symbol S, which is also called main rule. Whenever a new terminal x is encountered, it adds x to the last position of S, and then recursively enforces two constraints: 1) A symbol pair consisting of any two adjacent symbols ab occurs only once in the entire grammar. If there is a duplication, generate a new rule, A → ab, and enforce this constraint recursively. 2) All rules (except the main rule) will be applied at least twice. If a rule is applied only once, replace the nonterminal with the content of the rule where the nonterminal corresponding to the rule appears, remove the rule, and enforce the constraint recursively. The size of the context-free grammar generated by the sequitur algorithm is determined by the input sequence. In the best case, the size of such a grammar grows logarithmically when the symbols in the input sequence appear periodically. For example, a sequence aaaaaaaa can be represented by the following grammar:

S → AA, A → BB, B → aa. (4)

For sequences containing regular loop structures, the optimization scheme [33] can reduce the space occupied by the generated grammar from O(log(n)) to O(1). The optimization method adds an attribute to all symbols in the grammar, which marks the repetition times of the corresponding symbol, that is, for a symbol a repeated i times, it is represented by a i . Meanwhile, we add a constraint to the grammar generation process:

3) Any two adjacent symbols a i , a j will be converted to a i+j , recursively enforcing this constraint.

### Extracting Inter-process Behavior Patterns

If all processes keep a local symbol table, as the number of processes increases, the size of the resulting grammar will grow linearly. Therefore, we need to merge the symbol table across processes. Due to the wide use of the SPMD programming style in MPI programs, similar MPI functions are often called between processes. In collective communication, all processes share the exact same MPI functions. In addition, many inter-process point-to-point communications often exhibit similar behavior with the encoding method.

1) Merging Terminal Tables: Although the number of MPI function calls increases linearly with the number of processes, many MPI programs exhibit a significant amount of duplication in terminals between processes, which can be eliminated by recording the repeated terminals once and assigning a unique global number. The global id for computation terminals has already been generated and can be used during the merging process between processes. The time complexity of the entire merging process is log 2 P , where P is the number of processes. After the entire merge process is complete, the root process broadcasts a table of terminals to all other processes. Grammar 0

𝑆 1 → 𝐴 [0] 𝐵 0 5 𝑑 0 𝐴 → 𝑎𝑏𝑐 𝐵 → 𝑓𝐴 2

𝑆 2 → 𝐶 [1] 𝐷 1 5 𝑒 1 𝐶 → 𝑎𝑏𝑐 𝐷 → 𝑓𝐶 2

𝑆 1 → 𝐴 [0] 𝐵 0 5 𝑑 0 𝑆 2 → 𝐴 [1] 𝐷 1 5 𝑒 1 𝐴 → 𝑎𝑏𝑐 𝐵 → 𝑓𝐴 2 𝐷 → 𝑓𝐴 2

𝑆 1 → 𝐴 [0] 𝐵 0 5 𝑑 0 𝑆 2 → 𝐴 [1] 𝐵 1 5 𝑒 1 𝐴 → 𝑎𝑏𝑐 𝐵 → 𝑓𝐴 2

Merge 0 and 1 2) Merging Non-terminal Tables: To avoid conflicts, each terminal is substituted with a globally unique id, and each nonterminal is also uniquely identified. Identical non-terminals from different processes are merged based on depth, which measures the tree height in a tree representation where nonterminals are non-leaf nodes and terminals are leaf nodes. Merging is only possible for non-terminals with the same depth. We prioritize merging shallower trees first, sorting nonterminals by depth to minimize symbol table scans.

𝑆 → 𝐴 [0,1] 𝐵 0,1 5 𝑑 0 𝑒 1 𝐴 → 𝑎𝑏𝑐 𝐵 → 𝑓𝐴 2

The main rule, representing a process's overall logic, is often longer than other rules and exhibits similarities across processes due to the Single Program Multiple Data (SPMD) nature of many MPI programs. For merging main rules, we employ a longest common subsequence (LCS) approach. Each symbol in the main rule is initially tagged with its process number. We then compute the LCS between the main rules of two processes, merge the rank lists for symbols in the main rule, and maintain the original order for other symbols, as demonstrated in Figure 3 .

Merging of main rules is limited to processes with substantial similarity. Merging dissimilar main rules can result in a rule longer than the combined original rules, leading to excessive branching in the subsequent code generation. Thus, the main rules are first clustered based on minimum edit distance, and then rules within the same group are merged.

### Code Generation

By extracting intra-process and inter-process patterns, we can generate a symbol table and a grammar. By looking up the symbol table and traversing the grammar, we then produce executable C code. We use the grammar 5 as an example and generate the code snippet in Figure 4 . This grammar contains non-terminals S, A, B, communication events a, c, e and computation events b, d, f, g.

S → A A → B 5 ef [0] g [1-n] (5)

B → abcd 5 Initially, we convert a symbol table containing terminals and non-terminals into C code. Terminals, which include communication and computation events, are translated to MPI functions and computation function calls respectively, using parameter information and computation proxies. This corresponds to Line 13-16, 19-25, etc. of Figure 4 .

1 v o i d f u n t i o n _ A ( ) { 2 f o

Non-terminals are processed recursively by treating each as a function composed of terminals and other non-terminals. This involves generating function calls for terminals and direct calls for non-terminal functions within the content of a non-terminal function, like f unction A and f unction B in Figure 4 .

The main rule of a process includes process ranks for each symbol within its function content, dictating which processes execute the corresponding function. Conversion of the main rule into C code involves creating branch statements based on these ranks to guide process execution and merging consecutive symbols with identical ranks to minimize redundant branches.

121

## Comparison of compression ability

Compression is the key process to extract behavior patterns of MPI programs from a large volume of trace data. This section presents a comparison of the compressed data size achieved by Siesta in contrast to other trace compression methods, including ScalaBench [24] , Pilgrim [23] , [4] , LCR [21] , DwarfCode [6] . These methods focus on compressing communication traces while only recording the execution time for computational events. We also take a domain-agnostic compressor ZLIB as a baseline, which is used in the Open Trace Format [37] . Directly comparing Siesta's compressed data size with theirs does not yield a fair assessment, since Siesta records more detailed computation metrics. To ensure fairness in comparing compression ability, we combine Siesta with a histogram-based method, which is also used in Scal-aBench, to aggressively compress computational metrics.

Figure 5 illustrates the comparison of compressed trace sizes among the evaluated methods. ZLIB has the largest file sizes, due to its unawareness of the holistic structure of the trace data. In the task-specific compression methods, Siesta and LCR achieve the smallest file sizes in general. Siesta has better performance than LCR method for CG, MG, EP, and Sweep3d. However, LCR exhibits better scalability as the number of processes increases. This advantage stems from that LCR models communication events as a random process, while our approach remains lossless in recording the communication event sequence.

## INTRODUCTION
### Comparison to MINIME

To demonstrate the effect of mimicking performance characteristics, we compare Siesta with MINIME [10] , [1] . MINIME uses an iterative approach to adjust code blocks and mimic the performance of the original program. It uses Instructions Per Cycle (IPC), Cache Miss Rate (CMR), and Branch Misprediction Rate (BMR) to measure performance similarity to the original program, so we also use these three metrics for comparison.

We first experiment with a single computation event, as shown in the top three figures in Figure 6 . The origin in the figure corresponds to the sum of the computational parts of the tested programs. We consider the whole program execution as a single computation event and mimic it by MINIME and Siesta. For example, we sum up all the instructions and cycles of the computation part of a tested program and get its IPC. It can be seen that, for a single computation event, Siesta works better than MINIME. The difference stems from that Siesta introduces new code blocks with diverse performance characteristics, so that their combination can approximate an extensive range of performance metrics. Besides, MINIME models the problem as a multi-objective optimization task and solves it using a local search strategy, which may lead to a local optimum.

To elaborately mimic the performance characteristics of an MPI program in different execution periods, it is necessary to regard the execution as a sequence of events and mimic each 6 , when we mimic each computation event separately and sum them up, Siesta shows much higher similarity to the original program compared to MINIME.

### Comparison to ScalaBench

1) Time span similarity: In this section, we compare the results of Siesta and ScalaBench on Platform A, in terms of the error of reproducing the original program's execution time. Pilgrim is not taken as a baseline, although it is an advanced MPI trace compression tool and provides proxy-app generation functionality. Due to it only focuses on compressing and replaying communication information, without filling in the execution time of the computation part, the execution results of Pilgrim cannot reflect the original program's execution time, and the average error of its execution time is 84.30% across all programs we tested. The large error indicates that Pilgrim may not generate proxy-apps with thorough performance approximation, so we mainly compare Siesta with ScalaBench in later experiments.

Figure 7 shows the execution times of evaluated proxy-apps and the original programs. Siesta has similar execution time to the origin and outperforms Scalabench in the majority of cases. The mean percentage error across all programs can be calculated by the formula 100% × |(T gen -T app )/T app |. The errors of Siesta and ScalaBench are 5.01% and 10.22%, respectively. ScalaBench crashed when generating executable proxy-apps for certain programs, such as SP with 256 and 529 processes, and the three scientific simulations in the FLASH package. Therefore, we are not able to show the execution time of ScalaBench for these programs. Siesta represents the trace compactly while still preserving important details. Our approach can record more information compared to ScalaBench and is applicable to a wider range of programs.

Due to the limitation of the number of machines on Platform A, we tested large-scale experimental results of Siesta on Platform B. The experimental results are shown in Figure 8 . As the number of processes used increases, the proportion of communication time will increase. ScalaBench crashed when dealing with FLASH applications and BT with 1024 and 4096 processes.

In large-scale experiments, most tested applications are not computation-bound but communication-bound, so the execution time of the MPI program may not scale with process numbers. Since ScalaBench does not hold the same communication structure as the original MPI program, the execution time of its proxy becomes unfaithful, especially in MG. In contrast, the proxy generated by Siesta still maintains a high similarity in execution time compared to the original program. The mean percentage errors of Siesta and ScalaBench are 5.62% and 25.53%, respectively.

2) Robustness to MPI Implementation Changes: In this section, we compare the execution time accuracy with ScalaBench under different MPI implementations. The experimental results are shown in Figure 9 . As mentioned above, ScalaBench lacks data for SP under 256 and 529 processes and FLASH programs. The proxy-apps in the experiments are generated under openmpi. We then execute the proxy-apps using openmpi, mpich and mvapich, respectively.

In different MPI implementations, due to the different support for shared memory and network, the performance of MPI communication functions is also different, which has a direct impact on program execution time. Because Siesta preserves the communication mode in the original program trace losslessly, it can reproduce the original program execution time well with different MPI implementations. Specifically, for Siesta, the mean percentage error is 5.78%, while the error for ScalaBench is 33.58%. In ScalaBench, the iterative matching criteria is relaxed during compression, and a statistical histogram is constructed to record some parameter information, so that the communication mode of the original program can- 1e 2 BMR

### RELATED WORK A. Trace Compression

Tracing MPI programs' execution on HPC systems is a basic approach for performance analysis. Typical applications of trace include visualization [38] , debugging [39] , [40] , performance estimation [28] , inefficiency mining [30] , [41] , benchmark or proxy-app synthesis [24] , [12] , [6] , [9] , etc. Due to the increasing complexity and scale of HPC applications and systems, the storage cost of traces is becoming unaffordable.

Open trace format (OTF) [37] and its variant [42] are standard trace formats supported by many trace tools, like Vampir [43] and Tau [44] . OTF adopts zlib [45] to compress traces. Since zlib is agnostic to the repetition structure among traces, the compression ratio can be further improved.

Effective trace compression methods adopt specific data structures and matching algorithms to extract the repetition patterns in traces. ScalaTrace [46] and its successors [47] , [48] , [49] , [25] , [26] , [27] use data structures called regular section descriptors (RSD) and power-RSD to greedily find repetitive sequences in a trace. DwarfCode [6] , [9] models the trace compression problem as searching an optimal combination of primitive and inextensible tandem arrays, which is an NP-hard problem. To solve the problem in reasonable time complexity, DwarfCode adopts suffix trees to find a suboptimal solution to represent the repetition patterns of given traces. Omnisc'IO [33] and Pilgrim [23] , [4] use context-free grammars to represent traces. They use a modified Sequitur algorithm to generate the grammars, so that the size of grammars can be effectively controlled. Zhai et al. [50] , [51] , [52] , [41] conduct static top-down analysis on MPI program's source code, so they can efficiently obtain the repetition patterns. Note that the source code is not only from the program, but also from its dependent libraries. The requirement of the source code limits the application scenario of their method, especially when considering proprietary or confidential programs.

### Proxy-app Synthesis

A trace compression method can be used to generate synthetic proxy-apps (also called benchmarks in some literature), if the compressed trace can be transformed into executable code. ScalaBench [24] is a proxy-app synthesizer based on ScalaTrace variants. It uses histograms to approximate the communication parameter distributions of MPI programs. To ensure the approximated communication can be smoothly replayed, without mismatch or deadlock, it also implements a coordinator to control communication behaviors at runtime. DwarfCode outputs executable code as the result of trace compression, so it is naturally a proxy-app synthesizer. APPRIME [12] focuses on synthesizing proxy-apps to represent iterative simulation workloads for scientific computing. Astro [28] focuses on synthesizing proxy-apps to estimate the performance of MPI programs on larger parallel scales. Both APPRIME and Astro adopt a stochastic Markov process to model the status transition of MPI programs.

Kim et al. [14] , Panda et al. [7] , and MINIME [10] , [1] investigate synthesizing proxy-apps that fit given computation characteristics in certain scenarios, by designing and combining a series of code blocks. Kim

### Comparison

The design of Siesta is inspired by many existing studies.

Here is a summary of the difference between Siesta and related studies. Compared with ScalaBench, APPRIME, DwarfCode, and Pilgrim, Siesta achieves lossless representation of communication events and high-fidelity approximation on computation characteristics, while they conduct lossy compression on communication events and only regard computation behaviors as time intervals. Besides, we improve the extraction of inter-process patterns, achieving better compression than the state-of-the-art compression method Pilgrim. Compared with Kim's work [14] , Panda's work [7] , and MINIME [10] , [1] , Siesta solves a more general and challenging computation proxy synthesis problem on distributed architectures, where computation behaviors are more diverse than that on sharedmemory architectures they concern. We also propose a new design of predefined code blocks and a combination search algorithm that can closely approximate target metrics.

## CONCLUSION

In this study, we introduce Siesta, a novel framework designed to automatically synthesize proxy-apps for MPI programs. Siesta operates by tracing MPI programs to capture communication and computation events, symbolically representing these events, extracting behavioral patterns into a compact form, and translating this form into C code that replicates the original program's behaviors. We assessed Siesta's effectiveness on a variety of MPI programs, including kernels, mini-apps, and production-level scientific computing software. The results demonstrate that Siesta accurately reflects the performance characteristics of MPI programs.

Siesta's generated proxy-apps still exhibit limitations compared to those manually developed by experts. Specifically, manually developed proxy-apps can adjust to varying input arguments and parallel scales, while Siesta's outputs are constrained to specific execution paths and fixed configurations. Synthetic proxy apps are more suitable for frequently updated or customized (not covered by common benchmarks) workloads, providing useful supplements to manually developed proxy apps. The functionality of synthetic proxy-apps needs to be further enhanced in future work.

Fig. 2. Code block examples for mimicing behaviour of application

Fig. 3. Example of merging two grammars

r ( i t e r = 0 ; i t e r < 5 ; i t e r ++) l c o m p u t a t i o n _ p r o x y _ f ; 8 i f ( r a n k ! = 0 ) 9 c a l l c o m p u t a t i o n _ p r o x y _ g ; 10 } 11 12 v o i d f u n t i o n _ B ( ) { 13 M P I _ c a l l _ a ( . . . ) ; 14 c a l l c o m p u t a t i o n _ p r o x y _ b ; 15 M P I _ c a l l _ c ( . . . ) ; 16 c a l l c o m p u t a t i o n _ p r o x y _ d ; 17 } 18 19 v o i d c o m p u t a t i o n _ p r o x y _ b ( ) { 20 . . . 21 } 22 23 v o i d c o m p u t a t i o n _ p r o x y _ d (

Fig. 4. Code generation example with grammar in Equation 5

Fig. 6. Comparison of proxy-app performance metrics

Fig. 7. Comparison of proxy-app execution time

Fig. 8. Comparison of proxy-app execution time at large scale

et al. focus on APPs running on ARM-based mobile devices. Panda et al. focus on database workload. MINIME focuses on multi-thread programs with predefined parallel patterns. Since they only concern about shared-memory programs on a single node, their works do not involve communication events and do not need to analyze traces.

## CONCLUSION
### References

Minime-validator: Validating hardware with synthetic parallel testcases A Sen E Deniz B Kahne Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition DATE; Lausanne, Switzerland IEEE 2017. March 27-31, 2017. 2017 A. Sen, E. Deniz, and B. Kahne, "Minime-validator: Validating hardware with synthetic parallel testcases," in Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition, DATE 2017, Lausanne, Switzerland, March 27-31, 2017. IEEE, 2017, pp. 386-391.

Synchrotrace: Synchronization-aware architecture-agnostic traces for lightweight multicore simulation of CMP and HPC workloads K Sangaiah M Lui R Jagtap S Diestelhorst S Nilakantan A More B Taskin M Hempstead ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim 15 1 2018 K. Sangaiah, M. Lui, R. Jagtap, S. Diestelhorst, S. Nilakantan, A. More, B. Taskin, and M. Hempstead, "Synchrotrace: Synchronization-aware architecture-agnostic traces for lightweight multicore simulation of CMP and HPC workloads," ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 2:1-2:26, 2018.

Fast, accurate processor evaluation through heterogeneous, sample-based benchmarking P Prieto P A Fidalgo J Gregorio V Puente IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst 32 12 2021 P. Prieto, P. A. Fidalgo, J. Gregorio, and V. Puente, "Fast, accurate pro- cessor evaluation through heterogeneous, sample-based benchmarking," IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst., vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 2983-2995, 2021.

Near-lossless MPI tracing and proxy application autogeneration C Wang Y Guo P Balaji M Snir IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst 34 1 2023 C. Wang, Y. Guo, P. Balaji, and M. Snir, "Near-lossless MPI tracing and proxy application autogeneration," IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst., vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 123-140, 2023.

Simulation-based optimization and sensibility analysis of mpi applications: Variability matters T Cornebize A Legrand J. Parallel Distributed Comput 166 2022 T. Cornebize and A. Legrand, "Simulation-based optimization and sensibility analysis of mpi applications: Variability matters," J. Parallel Distributed Comput., vol. 166, pp. 111-125, 2022.

Dwarfcode: A performance prediction tool for parallel applications W Zhang A M K Cheng J Subhlok IEEE Trans. Computers 65 2 2016 W. Zhang, A. M. K. Cheng, and J. Subhlok, "Dwarfcode: A perfor- mance prediction tool for parallel applications," IEEE Trans. Computers, vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 495-507, 2016.

Proxy benchmarks for emerging big-data workloads R Panda L K John 10.1109/PACT.2017.44 26th International Conference on Parallel Architectures and Compilation Techniques, PACT 2017 Portland, OR, USA IEEE Computer Society September 9-13, 2017. 2017 R. Panda and L. K. John, "Proxy benchmarks for emerging big-data workloads," in 26th International Conference on Parallel Architectures and Compilation Techniques, PACT 2017, Portland, OR, USA, September 9-13, 2017. IEEE Computer Society, 2017, pp. 105-116. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/PACT.2017.44

Synthesizing benchmarks for predictive modeling C Cummins P Petoumenos Z Wang H Leather Proceedings of the 2017 International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization, CGO 2017 V J Reddi A Smith L Tang the 2017 International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization, CGO 2017 Austin, TX, USA ACM February 4-8, 2017. 2017 C. Cummins, P. Petoumenos, Z. Wang, and H. Leather, "Synthesizing benchmarks for predictive modeling," in Proceedings of the 2017 International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization, CGO 2017, Austin, TX, USA, February 4-8, 2017, V. J. Reddi, A. Smith, and L. Tang, Eds. ACM, 2017, pp. 86-99.

Automatic generation of benchmarks for i/o-intensive parallel applications M Hao W Zhang Y Zhang M Snir L T Yang J. Parallel Distributed Comput 124 2019 M. Hao, W. Zhang, Y. Zhang, M. Snir, and L. T. Yang, "Automatic generation of benchmarks for i/o-intensive parallel applications," J. Parallel Distributed Comput., vol. 124, pp. 1-13, 2019.

MINIME: pattern-aware multicore benchmark synthesizer E Deniz A Sen B Kahne J Holt IEEE Trans. Computers 64 8 2015 E. Deniz, A. Sen, B. Kahne, and J. Holt, "MINIME: pattern-aware multicore benchmark synthesizer," IEEE Trans. Computers, vol. 64, no. 8, pp. 2239-2252, 2015.

Miniapps derived from production HPC applications using multiple programing models O E B Messer E F D'azevedo J Hill W Joubert M A Berrill C Zimmer Int. J. High Perform. Comput. Appl 32 4 2018 O. E. B. Messer, E. F. D'Azevedo, J. Hill, W. Joubert, M. A. Berrill, and C. Zimmer, "Miniapps derived from production HPC applications using multiple programing models," Int. J. High Perform. Comput. Appl., vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 582-593, 2018.

Combining phase identification and statistic modeling for automated parallel benchmark generation Y Jin X Ma M Liu Q Liu J Logan N Podhorszki J Y Choi S Klasky SIGMETRICS. ACM 2015 Y. Jin, X. Ma, M. Liu, Q. Liu, J. Logan, N. Podhorszki, J. Y. Choi, and S. Klasky, "Combining phase identification and statistic modeling for automated parallel benchmark generation," in SIGMETRICS. ACM, 2015, pp. 309-320.

Record-and-replay techniques for HPC systems: A survey D Chapp K Sato D H Ahn M Taufer Supercomput. Front. Innov 5 1 2018 D. Chapp, K. Sato, D. H. Ahn, and M. Taufer, "Record-and-replay techniques for HPC systems: A survey," Supercomput. Front. Innov., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 11-30, 2018.

Workload synthesis: Generating benchmark workloads from statistical execution profile K Kim C Lee J H Jung W W Ro 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Workload Characterization, IISWC 2014 Raleigh, NC, USA IEEE Computer Society October 26-28, 2014. 2014 K. Kim, C. Lee, J. H. Jung, and W. W. Ro, "Workload synthesis: Generating benchmark workloads from statistical execution profile," in 2014 IEEE International Symposium on Workload Characterization, IISWC 2014, Raleigh, NC, USA, October 26-28, 2014. IEEE Computer Society, 2014, pp. 120-129.

Performance prediction for large-scale parallel applications using representative replay J Zhai W Chen W Zheng K Li IEEE Trans. Computers 65 7 2016 J. Zhai, W. Chen, W. Zheng, and K. Li, "Performance prediction for large-scale parallel applications using representative replay," IEEE Trans. Computers, vol. 65, no. 7, pp. 2184-2198, 2016.

Generating complex, realistic cloud workloads using recurrent neural networks S Bergsma T Zeyl A Senderovich J C Beck SOSP '21: ACM SIGOPS 28th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles Virtual Event / Koblenz, Germany ACM October 26-29, 2021. 2021 S. Bergsma, T. Zeyl, A. Senderovich, and J. C. Beck, "Generating complex, realistic cloud workloads using recurrent neural networks," in SOSP '21: ACM SIGOPS 28th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, Virtual Event / Koblenz, Germany, October 26-29, 2021. ACM, 2021, pp. 376-391.

Spec cpu2017: Nextgeneration compute benchmark J Bucek K.-D Lange J V Kistowski 10.1145/3185768.3185771 Companion of the 2018 ACM/SPEC International Conference on Performance Engineering, ser. ICPE '18 New York, NY, USA Association for Computing Machinery 2018 J. Bucek, K.-D. Lange, and J. v. Kistowski, "Spec cpu2017: Next- generation compute benchmark," in Companion of the 2018 ACM/SPEC International Conference on Performance Engineering, ser. ICPE '18. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2018, p. 41-42. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3185768.3185771

The nas parallel benchmarks D H Bailey E Barszcz J T Barton D S Browning R L Carter L Dagum R A Fatoohi P O Frederickson T A Lasinski R Schreiber H D Simon V Venkatakrishnan S Weeratunga Int. J. High Perform. Comput. Appl 5 3 1991 D. H. Bailey, E. Barszcz, J. T. Barton, D. S. Browning, R. L. Carter, L. Dagum, R. A. Fatoohi, P. O. Frederickson, T. A. Lasinski, R. Schreiber, H. D. Simon, V. Venkatakrishnan, and S. Weeratunga, "The nas parallel benchmarks," Int. J. High Perform. Comput. Appl., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 63-73, 1991.

A new metric for ranking high-performance computing systems J Dongarra M A Heroux P Luszczek 10.1093/nsr/nwv084 National Science Review 3 1 01 2016 J. Dongarra, M. A. Heroux, and P. Luszczek, "A new metric for ranking high-performance computing systems," National Science Review, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 30-35, 01 2016. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1093/nsr/nwv084

Exploring traditional and emerging parallel programming models using a proxy application I Karlin A Bhatele J Keasler B L Chamberlain J Cohen Z Devito R Haque D Laney E Luke F Wang D Richards M Schulz C Still 27th IEEE International Parallel & Distributed Processing Symposium (IEEE IPDPS 2013 Boston, USA May 2013 I. Karlin, A. Bhatele, J. Keasler, B. L. Chamberlain, J. Cohen, Z. DeVito, R. Haque, D. Laney, E. Luke, F. Wang, D. Richards, M. Schulz, and C. Still, "Exploring traditional and emerging parallel programming models using a proxy application," in 27th IEEE International Parallel & Distributed Processing Symposium (IEEE IPDPS 2013), Boston, USA, May 2013.

Lossy compression of communication traces using recurrent neural networks J Sun T Yan H Sun H Lin G Sun IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst 33 11 2022 J. Sun, T. Yan, H. Sun, H. Lin, and G. Sun, "Lossy compression of communication traces using recurrent neural networks," IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst., vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 3106-3116, 2022.

Predcom: A predictive approach to collecting approximated communication traces S Miwa I Laguna M Schulz IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst 32 1 2021 S. Miwa, I. Laguna, and M. Schulz, "Predcom: A predictive approach to collecting approximated communication traces," IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 45-58, 2021.

Pilgrim: scalable and (near) lossless MPI tracing C Wang P Balaji M Snir SC '21: The International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis St. Louis, Missouri, USA ACM November 14 -19, 2021. 2021 C. Wang, P. Balaji, and M. Snir, "Pilgrim: scalable and (near) loss- less MPI tracing," in SC '21: The International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, St. Louis, Missouri, USA, November 14 -19, 2021. ACM, 2021, pp. 52:1-52:14.

Scalabenchgen: Auto-generation of communication benchmarks traces X Wu V Deshpande F Mueller 26th IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium, IPDPS 2012 Shanghai, China IEEE Computer Society May 21-25, 2012. 2012 X. Wu, V. Deshpande, and F. Mueller, "Scalabenchgen: Auto-generation of communication benchmarks traces," in 26th IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium, IPDPS 2012, Shanghai, China, May 21-25, 2012. IEEE Computer Society, 2012, pp. 1250- 1260.

Scalaioextrap: Elastic I/O tracing and extrapolation X Luo F Mueller P H Carns J Jenkins R Latham R B Ross S Snyder 2017 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium, IPDPS 2017 Orlando, FL, USA IEEE Computer Society May 29 -June 2, 2017. 2017 X. Luo, F. Mueller, P. H. Carns, J. Jenkins, R. Latham, R. B. Ross, and S. Snyder, "Scalaioextrap: Elastic I/O tracing and extrapolation," in 2017 IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium, IPDPS 2017, Orlando, FL, USA, May 29 -June 2, 2017. IEEE Computer Society, 2017, pp. 585-594.

Scalable communication event tracing via clustering A Bahmani F Mueller J. Parallel Distributed Comput 109 2017 A. Bahmani and F. Mueller, "Scalable communication event tracing via clustering," J. Parallel Distributed Comput., vol. 109, pp. 230-244, 2017.

Chameleon: Online clustering of MPI program traces A Bahmani F Mueller IPDPS IEEE Computer Society 2018 A. Bahmani and F. Mueller, "Chameleon: Online clustering of MPI program traces," in IPDPS. IEEE Computer Society, 2018, pp. 1102- 1112.

Astro: Auto-generation of synthetic traces using scaling pattern recognition for MPI workloads J Chen R M Clapp IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst 28 8 2017 J. Chen and R. M. Clapp, "Astro: Auto-generation of synthetic traces using scaling pattern recognition for MPI workloads," IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst., vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 2159-2171, 2017.

Identifying hierarchical structure in sequences: A linear-time algorithm C G Nevill-Manning I H Witten Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research 7 1997 C. G. Nevill-Manning and I. H. Witten, "Identifying hierarchical structure in sequences: A linear-time algorithm," Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, vol. 7, pp. 67-82, 1997.

Ordering traces logically to identify lateness in message passing programs K E Isaacs T Gamblin A Bhatele M Schulz B Hamann P Bremer IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst 27 3 2016 K. E. Isaacs, T. Gamblin, A. Bhatele, M. Schulz, B. Hamann, and P. Bremer, "Ordering traces logically to identify lateness in message passing programs," IEEE Trans. Parallel Distributed Syst., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 829-840, 2016.

Statistical scalability analysis of communication operations in distributed applications J S Vetter M O Mccracken Proceedings of the 2001 ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming (PPOPP'01) the 2001 ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming (PPOPP'01) Snowbird, Utah, USA ACM June 18-20, 2001. 2001 J. S. Vetter and M. O. McCracken, "Statistical scalability analysis of communication operations in distributed applications," in Proceedings of the 2001 ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming (PPOPP'01), Snowbird, Utah, USA, June 18-20, 2001. ACM, 2001, pp. 123-132.

A portable programming interface for performance evaluation on modern processors S Browne J Dongarra N Garner G Ho P Mucci The international journal of high performance computing applications 14 3 2000 S. Browne, J. Dongarra, N. Garner, G. Ho, and P. Mucci, "A portable programming interface for performance evaluation on modern pro- cessors," The international journal of high performance computing applications, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 189-204, 2000.

Using formal grammars to predict i/o behaviors in hpc: The omnisc'io approach M Dorier S Ibrahim G Antoniu R Ross IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems 27 8 2015 M. Dorier, S. Ibrahim, G. Antoniu, and R. Ross, "Using formal gram- mars to predict i/o behaviors in hpc: The omnisc'io approach," IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 2435-2449, 2015.

The nas parallel benchmarks summary and preliminary results D H Bailey E Barszcz J T Barton D S Browning R L Carter L Dagum R A Fatoohi P O Frederickson T A Lasinski R S Schreiber Supercomputing'91: Proceedings of the 1991 ACM/IEEE conference on Supercomputing IEEE 1991 D. H. Bailey, E. Barszcz, J. T. Barton, D. S. Browning, R. L. Carter, L. Dagum, R. A. Fatoohi, P. O. Frederickson, T. A. Lasinski, R. S. Schreiber et al., "The nas parallel benchmarks summary and preliminary results," in Supercomputing'91: Proceedings of the 1991 ACM/IEEE conference on Supercomputing. IEEE, 1991, pp. 158-165.

Productivity and performance through components: the asci sweep3d application Y Yoon J C Browne M Crocker S Jain N Mahmood Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience 19 5 2007 Y. Yoon, J. C. Browne, M. Crocker, S. Jain, and N. Mahmood, "Productivity and performance through components: the asci sweep3d application," Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 721-742, 2007.

Flash: An adaptive mesh hydrodynamics code for modeling astrophysical thermonuclear flashes B Fryxell K Olson P Ricker F Timmes M Zingale D Lamb P Macneice R Rosner J Truran H Tufo The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series 131 1 273 2000 B. Fryxell, K. Olson, P. Ricker, F. Timmes, M. Zingale, D. Lamb, P. MacNeice, R. Rosner, J. Truran, and H. Tufo, "Flash: An adaptive mesh hydrodynamics code for modeling astrophysical thermonuclear flashes," The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, vol. 131, no. 1, p. 273, 2000.

Introducing the open trace format (OTF) A Knüpfer R Brendel H Brunst H Mix W E Nagel Computational Science -ICCS 2006, 6th International Conference Proceedings, Part II, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science Reading, UK Springer May 28-31, 2006. 2006 3992 A. Knüpfer, R. Brendel, H. Brunst, H. Mix, and W. E. Nagel, "Intro- ducing the open trace format (OTF)," in Computational Science -ICCS 2006, 6th International Conference, Reading, UK, May 28-31, 2006, Proceedings, Part II, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3992. Springer, 2006, pp. 526-533.

R-SHT: A state history tree with r-tree properties for analysis and visualization of highly parallel system traces L Prieur-Drevon R Beamonte M R Dagenais J. Syst. Softw 135 2018 L. Prieur-Drevon, R. Beamonte, and M. R. Dagenais, "R-SHT: A state history tree with r-tree properties for analysis and visualization of highly parallel system traces," J. Syst. Softw., vol. 135, pp. 55-68, 2018.

Light: replay via tightly bounded recording P Liu X Zhang O Tripp Y Zheng Proceedings of the 36th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation the 36th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation Portland, OR, USA ACM June 15-17, 2015. 2015 P. Liu, X. Zhang, O. Tripp, and Y. Zheng, "Light: replay via tightly bounded recording," in Proceedings of the 36th ACM SIGPLAN Confer- ence on Programming Language Design and Implementation, Portland, OR, USA, June 15-17, 2015. ACM, 2015, pp. 55-64.

Aggregate-driven trace visualizations for performance debugging V Anand M Stolet T Davidson I Beschastnikh T Munzner J Mace abs/2010.13681 CoRR 2020 V. Anand, M. Stolet, T. Davidson, I. Beschastnikh, T. Munzner, and J. Mace, "Aggregate-driven trace visualizations for performance debug- ging," CoRR, vol. abs/2010.13681, 2020.

Scalana: automating scaling loss detection with graph analysis Y Jin H Wang T Yu X Tang T Hoefler X Liu J Zhai Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, SC 2020 the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, SC 2020 Virtual Event / Atlanta, Georgia, USA IEEE/ACM November 9-19, 2020. 2020 28 Y. Jin, H. Wang, T. Yu, X. Tang, T. Hoefler, X. Liu, and J. Zhai, "Scalana: automating scaling loss detection with graph analysis," in Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, SC 2020, Virtual Event / Atlanta, Georgia, USA, November 9-19, 2020. IEEE/ACM, 2020, p. 28.

Mpi-focused tracing with OTFX: an mpi-aware in-memory event tracing extension to the open trace format 2 M Wagner J Doleschal A Knüpfer Proceedings of the 22nd European MPI Users' Group Meeting the 22nd European MPI Users' Group Meeting EuroMPI; Bordeaux, France ACM 2015. September 21-23, 2015. 2015 M. Wagner, J. Doleschal, and A. Knüpfer, "Mpi-focused tracing with OTFX: an mpi-aware in-memory event tracing extension to the open trace format 2," in Proceedings of the 22nd European MPI Users' Group Meeting, EuroMPI 2015, Bordeaux, France, September 21-23, 2015. ACM, 2015, pp. 7:1-7:8.

The vampir performance analysis toolset A Knüpfer H Brunst J Doleschal M Jurenz M Lieber H Mickler M S Müller W E Nagel Tools for High Performance Computing -Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Parallel Tools for High Performance Computing Stuttgart Springer July 2008. 2008 A. Knüpfer, H. Brunst, J. Doleschal, M. Jurenz, M. Lieber, H. Mickler, M. S. Müller, and W. E. Nagel, "The vampir performance analysis tool- set," in Tools for High Performance Computing -Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Parallel Tools for High Performance Computing, July 2008, HLRS, Stuttgart. Springer, 2008, pp. 139-155.

Characterizing I/O performance using the TAU performance system S Shende A D Malony W Spear K Schuchardt Applications, Tools and Techniques on the Road to Exascale Computing Advances in Parallel Computing Ghent, Belgium, ser IOS Press 31 August -3 September 2011. 2011 22 Proceedings of the conference ParCo 2011 S. Shende, A. D. Malony, W. Spear, and K. Schuchardt, "Characterizing I/O performance using the TAU performance system," in Applications, Tools and Techniques on the Road to Exascale Computing, Proceedings of the conference ParCo 2011, 31 August -3 September 2011, Ghent, Belgium, ser. Advances in Parallel Computing, vol. 22. IOS Press, 2011, pp. 647-655.

ZLIB compressed data format specification version 3.3 P Deutsch J Gailly RFC 1950. 1996 P. Deutsch and J. Gailly, "ZLIB compressed data format specification version 3.3," RFC, vol. 1950, pp. 1-11, 1996.

Scalatrace: Scalable compression and replay of communication traces for high-performance computing M Noeth P Ratn F Mueller M Schulz B R De Supinski J. Parallel Distributed Comput 69 8 2009 M. Noeth, P. Ratn, F. Mueller, M. Schulz, and B. R. de Supinski, "Sca- latrace: Scalable compression and replay of communication traces for high-performance computing," J. Parallel Distributed Comput., vol. 69, no. 8, pp. 696-710, 2009.

Probabilistic communication and I/O tracing with deterministic replay at scale X Wu K Vijayakumar F Mueller X Ma P C Roth International Conference on Parallel Processing, ICPP 2011 Taipei, Taiwan IEEE Computer Society September 13-16, 2011. 2011 X. Wu, K. Vijayakumar, F. Mueller, X. Ma, and P. C. Roth, "Probabilistic communication and I/O tracing with deterministic replay at scale," in International Conference on Parallel Processing, ICPP 2011, Taipei, Taiwan, September 13-16, 2011. IEEE Computer Society, 2011, pp. 196-205.

Scalaextrap: trace-based communication extrapolation for spmd programs X Wu F Mueller Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIG-PLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming, PPOPP 2011 the 16th ACM SIG-PLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming, PPOPP 2011 San Antonio, TX, USA ACM February 12-16, 2011. 2011 X. Wu and F. Mueller, "Scalaextrap: trace-based communication ex- trapolation for spmd programs," in Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIG- PLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming, PPOPP 2011, San Antonio, TX, USA, February 12-16, 2011. ACM, 2011, pp. 113-122.

Elastic and scalable tracing and accurate replay of non-deterministic events X Wu F Mueller International Conference on Supercomputing, ICS'13 Eugene, OR, USA ACM June 10 -14, 2013. 2013 X. Wu and F. Mueller, "Elastic and scalable tracing and accurate replay of non-deterministic events," in International Conference on Supercomputing, ICS'13, Eugene, OR, USA -June 10 -14, 2013. ACM, 2013, pp. 59-68.

CYPRESS: combining static and dynamic analysis for top-down communication trace compression J Zhai J Hu X Tang X Ma W Chen International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, SC 2014 New Orleans, LA, USA IEEE Computer Society November 16-21, 2014. 2014 J. Zhai, J. Hu, X. Tang, X. Ma, and W. Chen, "CYPRESS: combining static and dynamic analysis for top-down communication trace compres- sion," in International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, SC 2014, New Orleans, LA, USA, November 16-21, 2014. IEEE Computer Society, 2014, pp. 143-153.

Spindle: Informed memory access monitoring H Wang J Zhai X Tang B Yu X Ma W Chen 2018 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, USENIX ATC 2018 Boston, MA, USA USENIX Association July 11-13, 2018. 2018 H. Wang, J. Zhai, X. Tang, B. Yu, X. Ma, and W. Chen, "Spindle: In- formed memory access monitoring," in 2018 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, USENIX ATC 2018, Boston, MA, USA, July 11-13, 2018. USENIX Association, 2018, pp. 561-574.

Identifying scalability bottlenecks for large-scale parallel programs with graph analysis Y Jin H Wang X Tang T Hoefler X Liu J Zhai PPoPP '20: 25th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming San Diego, California, USA ACM February 22-26, 2020. 2020 Y. Jin, H. Wang, X. Tang, T. Hoefler, X. Liu, and J. Zhai, "Identifying scalability bottlenecks for large-scale parallel programs with graph analysis," in PPoPP '20: 25th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming, San Diego, California, USA, February 22-26, 2020. ACM, 2020, pp. 409-410.