## Dynamic Symbolic Verification of MPI Programs

Dhriti Khanna 1, Subodh Sharma 2, C´esar Rodr´ıguez 3, and Rahul Purandare 1

1

IIIT Delhi, India

2

IIT Delhi, India

3

Universit´e Paris 13, Sorbonne-Paris-Cit´e, LIPN, CNRS, France

Abstract. The success of dynamic verification techniques for Message Passing Interface (MPI) programs rests on their ability to address com munication nondeterminism. As the number of processes in the program grows, the dynamic verification techniques suffer from the problem of exponential growth in the size of the reachable state space. In this work, we provide a hybrid verification technique for message passing programs that combines explicit-state dynamic verification with symbolic analysis. The dynamic verification component deterministically replays the exe cution runs of the program, while the symbolic component encodes a set of interleavings of the observed run of the program in a quantifier free first order logic formula and verifies it for communication deadlocks. In the absence of property violations, it performs analysis to generate a different run of the program that does not fall in the set of already verified runs. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, which is sound and complete, using our prototype tool Hermes. Our evaluation indicates that Hermes performs significantly better than the state-of the-art verification tools for multi-path MPI programs.

Keywords: Dynamic Verification, Message Passing Interface, Deadlock Detection, Symbolic Analysis

### 1 Introduction

Message passing (MP) is a prominent paradigm via which nodes of the dis tributed systems can communicate. Typically, the MP programs are run on large computer clusters and are developed not only by career computer professionals but also by unconventional programmers affiliated to other disciplines of sci ence. However, designing MP programs is known to be a challenging exercise. Programmers have to anticipate the messaging patterns, perform data marshal ing and compute the locations for coordination in order to design correct and efficient programs. Unsurprisingly, this design complexity lends itself to the veri fication complexity of MP programs. The problem of communication races, which leads to data corruption or communication deadlocks, plays a central role in the verification complexity of MP programs. In the context of discovering communication deadlocks, the problem has been studied extensively over the years [2,11,14,17,19,20,23,25,28]. However, a scal able solution remains elusive; this is primarily due to the nondeterminism in

the semantics of MP primitives. For instance, in MPI (Message Passing Inter 
face [21], a popular standard for writing parallel programs in C/Fortran) use 
of the wildcard receive call can lead to nondeterministic matching with poten 
tial senders at runtime [30]. Presence (or absence) of buffering in MPI nodes 
can also contribute to nondeterminism; for instance, standard blocking sends 
semantics are dependent on the presence of system buffering – under no system 
buffering the send calls behave as synchronous calls while under infinite buffer 
ing the same send calls complete immediately without even requiring a matching 
receive call. MPI implementations allow nodes to provide buffering in order to 
improve the performance, however, the nondeterminism resulting from buffering 
can potentially introduce additional deadlocks [31]. 
It is worthwhile to note that nondeterministic communication of data can 
affect the control-flow of the program (e.g., when the communicated data to 
a wildcard receive is used in a subsequent branch instruction of the program). 
Programs with the pattern mentioned above are termed as multi-path programs 
[9], and they significantly affect the scalability of existing verification techniques. 
Correspondingly, single-path programs are those (paraphrasing from [9]) where 
the program executes irrespective of the data communicated to a receive call, 
the same sequence of instructions, i.e., the control-flow of the program remains 
unaffected by the communication actions in the program. 
Explicit-state runtime model checkers of MPI programs, such as ISP [30] 
and DAMPI [33], can analyse multi-path (and single-path) MPI programs for 
the absence of communication deadlocks and assertion violations. However, they 
require the programs to be repeatedly run such that in each run a distinct 
communication pattern checkers are exhaustive in their exploration under a fixed 
input and a buffering mode (viz. zero and infinite [31]), they suffer from a 
possible requirement of a considerable number of program re-runs. It is often 
the case that much of the time is spent in verifying the loops of the program 
containing only computation code that is of little relevance to establish the 
correctness of the communication structure of the program. 
Recently, symbolic analysis techniques for MP program executions have been 
proposed. Although they do address the problem of program re-runs by symbol 
ically encoding the interleavings to explore, they can only be applied to single 
path programs [10, 15, 22]. These techniques are classified as trace verification 
techniques and the tools as trace verifiers. 
Techniques which perform full-blown symbolic execution of a program can 
discover deadlocks and other assertion violations in multi-path programs [3, 11, 
28]. While they cover both the input space and communication nondeterminism, 
they are known to not scale beyond a relatively small size of the program and a 
few processes. 
We present a general technique to verify multi-path MPI that is complemen 
tary to the above-mentioned techniques. Our technique combines the strengths 
of trace verification and symbolic execution techniques, which, respectively, are 
scalability and multi-path coverage. Furthermore, our technique is able to verify 
programs with not only zero- or inifinite-buffering, but also with nondetermin 

istic buffering decisions up to a bound k. While we present the technique in the context of verifying MPI programs for the absence of deadlocks, it can be ap plied to other properties, such as assertion violations. We demonstrate that our technique is sound and complete within a context and finally demonstrate the effectiveness of the technique by implementing it as a prototype tool Hermes.

### 2 Overview

In this section, we present an overview of our hybrid method which discovers 
deadlocks in multi-path MPI programs. The technique exhaustively explores 
the executions of the program under a fixed input as follows: (i) it obtains 
a concrete run ρ of the program via dynamic analysis (via a scheduler that 
orchestrates a run); (ii) encodes symbolically the set of feasible runs obtained 
from the same set of events as observed in ρ such that each process triggers the 
same control-flow decisions and executes the same sequence of communication 
calls as in ρ (note that the encoding captures the entire set of runtime matches of 
communication events from ρ); (iii) check for violations of any property (in our 
case, communication deadlocks); and (iv) if no property is violated, then alter 
the symbolic encoding to explore the feasibility of taking an alternate control 
flow behavior which is different from ρ. In case of such a feasibility, initiate a 
different concrete run. 
Consider the program shown in Figure 1(a). It is a nondeterministic, multi 
path, and deadlock-free program. The non-colored lines illustrate the pseudo 
code of the program. It is worthy to note that trace verifiers will fail to verify 
the program since the program has multiple control flow branches and the non 
deterministic matching choice of R1 governs the execution of these branches. 
Our approach statically discovers the code locations where the received data 
or message tags (a field in MPI send and receive calls that serve as a unique 
marker for messages) are used to branch at conditional statements. At these lo 
cations, we instrument calls to a scheduler, which schedules the MPI calls of the 
program according to the MPI semantics and drives the execution. The sched 
uler is also responsible for building a partially ordered happens-before relation 
between these calls (refer Section 3). At runtime, the instrumented code commu 
nicates the predicate expression in the branching instruction to the scheduler. 
The instrumented code is shown in blue color in Figure1(a). 
Based on a trace ρ the symbolic encoding is generated from the execution 
of the program with instrumented code. The communication events and the 
branching decisions made in this trace are modeled as an SMT formula. This 
formula encodes all the semantically possible schedules of events observed in ρ, 
which follow the same control-flow decisions as made in ρ. 
In the example shown in Figure1(a), Process 0 executes the first control flow 
branch if R1 matches with either S1 or S2. If R1 matches S1, the SMT formula 
will encode the interleavings 1 and 2 as shown in Figure 1(b). An SMT solver is 
used to solve this formula, which checks for the violation of the safety property. 
This verifies two interleavings. If there is no property violation, we verify another 

Process 0 Process 1 
Recv(*, x); //R1 Send(P0, 10); //S1 
if (x==10) Process 2 
Recv(*, y); //R2 Send(P0, 10); //S2 
toScheduler(‘x==10’); Process 3 
else if (x==20) Send(P0, 30); //S3 
Recv(*, y); //R3 
toScheduler(‘x==20’); 
else if (x==30) 
Recv(*, y); //R4 
toScheduler(‘x==30’); 
Recv(*, z); //R5 
(a) Instrumented non single-path program. 

R1

R4

schedule6

S1-R5

R5

schedule5

S2-R5

S1-R4 S2-R4

R3

R5

schedule4

S1-R5

R5

schedule3

S3-R5

S1-R3 S3-R3

R2

R5

schedule2

S2-R5

R5

schedule1

S3-R5

S2-R2 S3-R2

S1-R1 S2-R1 S3-R1 (b) All possible interleavings.

Fig. 1. A multi-path program and its interleavings.

control flow path that may have been taken if R1 had matched with some other send. To this effect, we want to change the path condition obtained from the trace to reschedule another execution through an unvisited control-flow. Hence, we alter the path condition (in a typical symbolic execution style) and execute the program again, so that it follows the path corresponding to the altered path condition. To force the scheduler to follow a different control-flow branch, we may also have to force a wildcard receive call to match with a send call that

sends data different from the send call that matched before. We repeat this 
process until all the paths in the program are exhausted. In the context of the 
above example, in the second execution, R1 must match S3, and it must avoid 
matching S2 because S2 is sending the same data as S1 (S1 had already matched 
with R1 in the first execution). The encoding resulting from this run will cover 
schedules 3 to 6. 
The example program has six possible interleavings across multiple control 
flow paths. Our technique executes the program only twice to cover all of them 
and thus shows the contrasting difference from trace verification which does not 
provide full path coverage and from dynamic verification which executes the 
program as many times as there are possible interleavings. 

### 3 MPI Model and Execution Semantics

In this section we formalize the execution of an MPI program. The MPI run time often provides buffers to store the data of issued but unfinished calls. The presence of buffers can introduce subtle behaviors in a program [26, 31]. Due to space limitations we present a zero-buffer semantics, but our results hold for zero-, infinite-, and κ-buffer modes, with κ ∈ N.

We consider MPI programs consisting of n ∈ N processes P1, · · · , Pn in a single communication group. Each process Pi manipulates a set of process-local variables Vari. Let Var =

S i Vari. We model the execution of the program as a sequence of events, one for each executed MPI call. An event of process Pi is a tuple e := h c, a, di , where c is a path constraint over Vari (describing the conditional branches taken by Pi to produce the event, the constraint language is left unspecified), a is an MPI call, and d ∈ N is a depth which increments

monotonically with the events of Pi. We let E denote the set of all possible 
events, p(e) := Pi the process of e, and l(e) := a the MPI call of e. 
Without loss of generality, we only model nonblocking MPI operations and 
MPI Wait. Nonblocking calls return immediately with a handle that can later 
be passed to MPI Wait for the process to block until the operation completes. 
An MPI call is either a nonblocking send (resp. receive) issued by process Pi 
to send data to (resp. receive from) process Pj with tag t, denoted by Si,j,t 
(resp. Ri,j,t); or a nonblocking barrier issued by process Pi, denoted by Bi; 
or a (blocking) wait issued by process Pi in order to wait for the completion 
of the so-called corresponding event at depth h, denoted by Wi,h. For a wait 
event e := h c, Wi,h, di the corresponding event, corr(e), is the only event of Pi 
whose depth is h. 
The MPI runtime matches send and receive operations (among others) using 
the well-defined semantics. Given events e := h c, a, di and e0 := h c0, b, d0i , we say 
that e matches before e0, denoted by e1 ≺ mo e2, iff p(e) = p(e0), and d ≤ d0, and 
one of the following is satisfied: (i) a and b are send calls (resp. receive calls) to 
the same destination (resp. from the same source) with the same tags; (ii) a is 
a wildcard receive call and b is a receive call sourcing from the same process, or 
a wildcard receive and the tags of calls a and b are the same, or the tag of call a 
is a wildcard; (iii) a is a nonblocking call and b is an associated wait call. 
We view the execution of an MPI program as a sequence of events in E∗, but 
not all sequences correspond to executions. We now define a Labeled Transition 
System (LTS) h Q, → , q0i whose runs capture the valid executions. The states 
in Q are tuples of the form h I, M, zi where I ⊆ E is the set of issued events, 
M ⊆ E is the set of matched events, and z : N → N maps every process to 
the depth of the next event expected from that process. The initial state q0 is 
h∅ , ∅ , zoi , where z0 maps all processes to 0. 
The ≺ mo order captures matching constraints that exclusively depend on 
the types of the calls involved in the check. However, matching Ri,∗ ,t calls re 
quires information about the state. Given a state s := h I, M, zi and events 
e := h c, Ri,j,t, di and e0 := h c0, Ri,∗ ,t, d0i , we say that e conditionally matches 
before e0, denoted by e ≺ co e0, iff d ≤ d0 and ∃ eˆ ∈ I such that l(ˆe) = Sj,i,t. 
The transitions in → ∈ Q× 2 E 
× Q are labeled by sets of events representing 
either the issuing or completion of MPI calls to the runtime or the matching of 
communication calls by the runtime. Thus, we have three classes of transitions: 
Issue, Match, and Complete transitions. 
Issue transitions capture the call to a nonblocking MPI primitive represented 
by event e := h c, a, di . Formally, h I, M, zi { e} 
−−→ h I ∪ { e} , M, z0i iff d = z(p(e)), 
and z0 is equal to z except for z0(p(e)) which is z(p(e)) + 1, and I does not 
contain any event whose action is a wait from process p(e). 
Match transitions correspond to the MPI runtime matching a set of issued 
events (e.g., a send with a receive). Formally, h I, M, zi 
m 
−→ h I \ m, M ∪ m, 
ziexactly when there is some m ⊆ I such that either of the three conditions hold: 
(i) m := { e, e0} with l(h e, e0i ) = h Si,j,t, Rj,i,t0 i and @eˆ ∈ I,(ˆe ≺ mo e ∨ eˆ ≺ mo e0), 
and t0 ∈ { t, ∗} ; or (ii) m := { e, e0} with l(h e, e0i ) = h Si,j,t, Rj,∗ ,t0 i and @eˆ ∈ 

I,(ˆe ≺ mo e ∨ eˆ ≺ mo e0 ∨ eˆ ≺ co e0), and t0 ∈ { t, ∗} ; or (iii) m := { e1, . . . , en} with 
l(ei) = Bi for all i ∈ { 1, . . . , n} and @eˆ ∈ I,(ˆe ≺ mo e1 ∨ . . . ∨ eˆ ≺ mo en). 
Finally, complete transitions correspond to calls to MPI wait returning the 
control to the process because the corresponding event has already been matched. 
Formally, h I, M, zi { e} 
−−→ h I\{ e} , M\{ corr(e)} , zi iff l(e) := Wi,d and corr(e) ∈ M. 
An execution trace (or just trace) ρ ∈ E∗ is any sequence formed by the 
events contained in the singletons that label a run of the LTS which only uses 
issue transitions. An MPI program P has a deadlock if it can generate a trace ρ 
that ends in a deadlocking state, i.e., one with no successors in the LTS. Deciding 
whether a single-path program has a deadlock is an NP-complete problem [10], 
under finite and infinite system buffering. Note that our events are guarded MPI 
calls and thus each trace of P is essentially a single-path program. Since, P has 
a finite number of single-path programs, it follows that the deadlock detection 
problem under κ-buffering for P is also NP-complete. 

### 4 Encoding Rules

In this section we define SMT encoding rules such that for a deadlocking execu 
tion trace ρ, the variables of the encoding get satisfied and the generated model 
provides information about the calls that remained unmatched in ρ. The first 
step is defining an (over-approximated) set of sets of events, M + 
∈ 2 E, consisting 
of all possible sets that the LTS could make using the match transition using 
the same events as in ρ but possibly issued in a different order. 
Definition 1. M +: The M + set is an over-approximate set of the matching calls 
in a trace [10]: 
M + = {{ a, b} ⊆ E | a = h− , Si,j,− , −i , b = h− , Rj,i/∗ ,− , −i , 
∀ a0 ≺ mo a ∃ b06 mo b : { a0, b0} ∈ M +, 
∀ b0 ≺ mo b ∃ a06 mo a : { a0, b0} ∈ M + 

}

∪ {{ a} ⊆ E | a = h− , Wi,h, −i} ∪ {{ a1, · · · , aN } ⊆ E | ∀ i ∈ { 1, . . . , n} , ai = h− , Bi, −i} . Let M +(a) =

S { b|∃ α ∈ M + : a, b ∈ α} be the set of all potential matching calls for the operation a. Let Imm(a) be the set of all immediate ancestors of event a. We define it by Imm(a) = { x| x ≺ a, ∀ z : x z a =⇒ z ∈ { x, a}} . Note that ≺ = (≺ mo ∪ ≺ co) (resp. for ). Following [10], we restrict our presentation to problems without barriers with out introducing spurious models. In Figure 2, we provide the list of rules that encode all feasible interleavings of a given ρ. First, we explain the meaning and purpose of each variable used in the encoding. We use tag, src (resp. dest), and val as integer variables to encode MPI call operands such as message tag, sender’s (resp. receiver’s) identity, and the data payload, respectively. Note that for sim plicity we assume the data payload to be of primitive types (such as Integer). In order to model an interleaved run, we use an integer variable clk for each call in

ρ. Variables m and r are boolean variables which signify the matching and the readiness (all ≺ mo ancestors of the event are matched) of an event, respectively. A boolean variable bufferUsed is used when an event uses the buffer provided by the MPI runtime. We refer the above mentioned variables corresponding to an event a by the variable name sub-scripted with event symbol, for instance, clock variable for event a is denoted by clka. Corresponding to every α ∈ M + we have a boolean variable sα which we set to true when the events in α occur as a match in ρ. We further define I ⊆ Eρ to be the set of event pairs (a, b) such that a and b are consecutive sends from one process but with different destinations. Buffering a can potentially impact the ≺ mo relation with respect to call b. When both a and b are send calls targeting the same destination, then, despite buffering, the ≺ mo relation between a and b stands unmodified. This is because the FIFO matching guarantee provided by the MPI standard is impervious to the underlying system buffering.

1. Partial Order: V b∈ Eρ V a∈ (Imm(c):(a,b)6∈I clka < clkb

2. Match Pair: V a:(s,r)∈M + sa → (clks = clkr) ∧ (datas = datar) ∧ (tags = tagr) 
3. Unique Match for Send: V (a,b)∈M + V (a,c)∈M + sab → !sac 
4. Unique Match for Receive: V (a,b)∈M + V (c,b)∈M + sab → !scb 

5. Conditional Partial Order: (a) V a∈ Eρ ra → r clka = clkImm(a) + 1 (b) V (a,b)∈E V c∈M +(b) (r clkc > r clka ∧ V d∈M +(a) r clkc > r clkd) → clka < clkb

6. Match Correct: V a∈ r (ma → W (b,a)∈M + (sba)) ∧V a∈ s (ma → W (a,b)∈M + (sab))

7. Matched only: V a:(a1,a2,...,an)∈M + sa →V ai∈ a mai

8. All Ancestors Matched: V b∈ Eρ (rb ↔ V a=Imm(b) ma)

9. Match Only Issued: V a∈ Eρ (ma → ra)

10. Use Buffer:

V (a,b)∈I (ra∧ k > 0 → (bufferUseda∧ dec(k)))∧ (k = 0 → !bufferUseda∧ clka < clkb) 11. Free buffer: 
V a∈ Eρ k = ite(ma ∧ bufferUseda, inc(k), k) 
12. No Match Possible: 
V a∈M + ( 
W t∈ a(mt∨ !rt)) 13. Not All Matched: 

W a∈ Eρ!ma 14. Path Condition: πρ Fig. 2. SMT rules.

In Figure 2, most SMT rules are similar to the propositional rules from [10], except Rules 2, 5, 10, 11 and 14. Rule 1 encodes the ≺ mo relation with an

exception – the order between a pair of send calls (a, b) ∈ I is encoded in 
Rule 10. Rule 5 encodes the semantics of ≺ co ordering. We start with an over 
approximate set E that has pairs of receive calls (deterministic receive call, a, 
followed by a wildcard receive call b). An order is established between such a 
pair only when there is a ready send call that can match a but no send call that 
can match b. To record the notion of time at which calls become ready, we use 
the variable rclk. Rules 12 and 13 encode the deadlock detection constraints. 
Encoding for κ-Buffer Mode Semantics: Rules 10 and 11 encode the be 
havior of a program with κ-buffer semantics. The maximum number of buffer 
slots, κ, available with the program is provided by the user. If a buffer slot is 
available, the partial order relation between some of the send calls can be relaxed 
(as explained before). 
Encoding for Path Condition: Rule 14 encodes the guards of each event 
in Eρ. The guards are the path constraints obtained from the expressions of 
conditional statements encountered along the program execution. 
Theorem 1. Given a trace ρ of program P, ρ ends in a deadlocking state iff 
there is a satisfying assignment of the variables to values in the SMT encoding 
of the deadlock detection problem. 
The proof of this theorem is similar to the one used in [10]. It suffices to 
show that (i) for every deadlocking trace of the program, the encoding rules are 
satisfied, and (ii) whenever the rules are satisfied, the trace deadlocks. For this, 
we construct a trace corresponding to the model generated by the solver (which 
conforms to the MPI semantics) and prove that it is deadlocking. Theorem 1 
formally establishes the correctness of our SMT encoding. 

### 5 Design

Hermes comprises of three components: program instrumenter, constraint gen erator and solver, and instruction rescheduler. In this section, we describe the functionality of these components and present the algorithm that Hermes im plements. Figure 3 gives an architectural overview of Hermes.

5.1 Components

Program Instrumenter: The instrumenter is developed using Clang [5]. Clang is the front-end for the LLVM compiler and provides features to analyse, optimize, and instrument C/C++ source code. It targets the locations in the code where the data or the tag received in a wildcard receive is decoded in the predicate expression of a conditional construct, the body of which issues an MPI call. It instruments these locations with TCP calls to the scheduler which is responsible for driving the execution of the program. The instrumented calls are used to communicate the predicate expressions to the scheduler at runtime. We use ISP’s dynamic verification engine as the scheduler.

Constraint Generator and Solver: The instrumented program is input to the ISP scheduler which executes it. The execution of the program drives the instru mentation to generate a path condition π which corresponds to the expressions of the conditional constructs encountered at target locations during the run. We also generate a set of potential matches, M +, and a sequence of MPI events, ρ, from the run. M +, π, and ρ are used to encode the trace of the program in the form of SMT rules given in Section 4, which conform to the MPI semantics. The satisfiability of the rules signifies the presence of a deadlock. Please note that the technique presented in this paper is a general verification technique to cover all possible schedules for a given input. The encoding rules provided in Section 4, however, are targeted for deadlock detection.

Fig. 3. Architecture of the approach.

Instruction Rescheduler: If the SMT solver cannot generate a model (UN SAT query), we modify π in a way similar to the concolic execution to try and infer the existence of an other executable control flow path. In a non-chronological order, we perform a depth-first search over a tree of con trol flow paths where the branching points in the tree map to the con ditional constructs in the target pro gram. The resulting formula is denoted by φ. Although we modify the path condition in a fashion similar to concolic execution, we do not inherit its legacy problem of path complexity. This is because (i) unlike concolic execution, we do not symbolically interpret the entire program, and (ii) in our experience, the conditional expressions in multi-path MPI programs are simple equality checks (we have not come across benchmark programs where the relevant conditional expressions were complex).

5.2 Deadlock Detection

Algorithm 1 formally presents the functionality of the components described in Section 5.1. The input to the algorithm is an instrumented MPI program. Execution of the program at line 1 generates a program trace: ρ, a path condition: π, and the potential send-receive match set generated from ρ: M +. The while loop at line 2 executes the program repeatedly until either all of the possible control flow paths are explored or a deadlock is reported. In every iteration of the loop, we encode the trace ρ into a set of SMT rules and check their satisfiability. If we get a model from the SMT solver, then we report the deadlock as the output and exit as shown in lines 3-7. Otherwise, we search for a different control flow path by calling the procedure SearchDifferentPath at line 9. If that procedure is unable to find any other feasible path, we report an absence of the deadlock at line 11 and exit. Otherwise, we repeat the entire process.

Algorithm 1: Deadlock Detection. 
Data: Instrumented Program: P 
Result: 
1. Guarantee that a deadlock does not occur 
2. Model of the MPI calls if a deadlock is present 
1  = execute P

2 while true do

3 φen = encode(M

+ , ρ) 4 res = solver(φen ∪ φπ)

5 if res == SAT then 
6 report ‘Deadlock’; exit 
7 else 
8 φ = SearchDifferentPath(ρ, π, M 

+ )

9 if φ = ∅ then 
10 report ‘No Deadlock’; exit 
11 else 
12 < π, ρ, M 

+ > = execute P conforming to φ

We describe in Algorithm 2 the procedure to change the path condition and 
to generate constraints φ. The input to the algorithm is π, ρ, M +. Incrementally, 
we start negating the expressions in π from last to first in the loop starting at 
line 2. In line 3, we remove the expressions in the path condition from (i+1) th 
position until the end and invert the i th last conditional in π to get the altered 
conditional expression c at line 5. This c is clubbed with the already present 
constraints in a maintained constraint stack to get φ at line 7. 
We check if it is possible to drive the execution through the altered path 
in lines 8-11. For this, we issue a query to the solver with constraints formed 
from the rules given in Section 4 (φ0en) and the constraints accumulated in the 
constraint stack (φ). 
In order to compute φ0en, we require (i) a subset of M + which we denote by 

+ clip, and (ii) a subsequence of the execution trace which is denoted by ρclip. Both M

+ clip and ρclip, are formed over the set of ordered MPI calls until the point of the conditional block whose predicate is negated in π0(c). For brevity, we have only shown the details for chronological backtracking without any optimizations. An optimization strategy is presented in Section 6.1.

5.3 Correctness and Termination The encoding presented in [10] is shown to be sound and complete. The en coding in Algorithm 1 is similar to the encoding from [10], hence the proof of soundness and completeness is also similar. We omit the proof here due to space consideration, but it can be found at Hermes’s site. 4The procedure SearchDifferentPath (shown in Algorithm 2) is sound and complete since we assume the traces are of finite length and the number of distinct control-flow

4 https://github.com/DhritiKhanna/Hermes

Algorithm 2: Searching different control flow path. Data: ρ, π, M

+

| | 3 | | | remove(π[i | + 1] : π[size]) | | | |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| | 4 | | | π0 = | negate(π[i]) | | | |
| | 5 | | | c = π0[i] | | | | |
| | 6 | | | add c | in constraintStack | | | |

Result: φ 1 size = length(π)-1 2 forall i ∈ size : 0 do 7 φ =

j=

constraintStack[j]

top j=1

S

+ clip, σclip) - φsafety

8 φ0en = encode(M

9 res = solver(φ0en ∪ φ)

10 if res == SAT then 
11 return φ 
12 return ∅ 
paths in a program is bounded. Thus, by composition, Hermes is sound and 
complete for a single input. 
Algorithm 2 returns ∅ and terminates at line 12 when it finishes its exhaus 
tive search corresponding to the complete tree of possible control-flow execution 
paths. Note that the tree of possible control-flow paths is of finite height and 
width. Algorithm 1’s termination is either contingent on the termination of Al 
gorithm 2 or when a deadlock is found at line 6. We conclude that the analysis 
performed by Hermes terminates. 

### 6 Implementation

We have implemented the proposed technique in a prototype tool called Hermes. We used Clang [5] to instrument the program, ISP [30] as the execution engine or the scheduler, and Z3 [6] as the constraint solver. In the following subsections, we describe the optimizations that we have implemented to limit infeasible control flow paths. These optimizations are conservative and do not affect the soundness and completeness of the approach.

6.1 Non-chronological Backtracking

Pi Pj

Ri,1(from ∗ , x) Rj,1(from ∗ , y) if(x == 10) if(y == 5) Ri,2(from Pk) Sj,2(to Pi, 10)

Performing chronological backtracking to al 
ter the path condition π may result in gener 
ating queries that cannot be satisfied by the 
solver. Consider the call Ri,1 in the adjoin 
ing example matches with Sj,2. π will con 
tain the constraint assume(x == 10) which, at some point during backtrack 
ing, will be inverted. However, inverting this condition alone will generate no 
new feasible control-flow path unless Ri,1 matches with a send other than Sj,2. 

Thus, inverting the constraint assume(x == 10) will require the inversion of assume(y == 5). These two conditions can be a part of a chain of dependencies that form an unsat-core of the unsatisfied formula. Hence, instead of chrono logical backtracking, we find the culpable conflict and backjump directly to the root of this dependency chain and negate the expression of the root node. The static analysis component of the program instrumentation block identifies the conditional expressions which introduce these dependencies. In a tree of control flow paths, let there be a dependency chain of size d on path p. After verifying p, the number of SAT queries required (in the worst case) to find another feasible control-flow path in chronological backtracking is d. However, with non-chronological backtracking, only one SAT query should suffice.

6.2 Terminated Interleavings 
Discovering a new control-flow path in Algorithm 2 requires a change of received 
data of the wildcard receive corresponding to the negated assume expression. In 
order to ascertain whether such an execution exists SMT solver is invoked with 
the modified path condition along with the other constraints. The constraints 
of the modified path condition depend on the over-approximate match-set M +, 
but the program actually runs with ISP’s scheduler which makes the matches 
based on the ample-set. Since | ample-set| ≤ |M + 
| , there may be cases when the 
SMT solver returns a model from line 10 in Algorithm 2, but an actual run sat 
isfying φ may not be possible. We handle these scenarios in our implementation 
by terminating such runs and restoring the state of the previous correct run. We 
provide an example of a terminated interleaving at our tool’s site. 5 

### 7 Evaluation

The purpose of evaluating Hermes is to assess its efficiency and effectiveness in verifying message passing programs. We set this evaluation in the context of C/C++ MPI programs 5 and compare Hermes against the state-of-the-art ver ification tools. To guide the evaluation, we ask the following research questions: [RQ1] How well does the proposed approach fair against state-of-the-art tech niques for single-path and multi-path programs? [RQ2] Is the proposed approach effective in discovering deadlocks exposed under finite buffer mode? Artifacts and Runtime Environment: We used the FEVS test-suite [27] and benchmarks from prior research papers [2,13,29,36]. The multi-path benchmarks include Matrix Multiply, Integrate, Workers, and Monte Carlo for pi calculation. A majority of the benchmarks are based on the client-server architecture. The experiments were performed on a 64 bit, Intel quad-core machine with 1.7 GHz processors, 4 GB of RAM, and Ubuntu version 14.04. We used ISP version 3.1 and Z3 version 4.4.2. All timings reported are in seconds and are averaged over

5 https://github.com/DhritiKhanna/Hermes

Table 1. Performance comparison for single-path MPI programs.

B’mark #P B D

ISP Mopper Aislinn CIVL Hermes Detect Runs Time Detect Time Detect Time Detect Time Detect Time

DTG

5 0 ✔ Yes 3 2.135 Yes 0.007 Yes 0.830

Yes 8.72

Yes 0.0365 5 ∞ 3 2.257 0.043 0.815 0.077 8 0 ✔ Yes 3 2.220 Yes 0.011 Yes 1.135

Yes 8.78

Yes 0.040 8 ∞ 3 2.307 0.044 1.139 0.080

Gauss Elim

4 0 1 0.529 0.210 8.936 TO 0.300 8 0 1 0.371 0.295 14.322 TO 0.423 16 0 1 2.041 0.408 TO TO 0.659 32 0 1 5.457 0.856 TO TO 1.163

Heat

4 0 ✔ Yes 7 8.572 Yes 0.365 ? ? Yes 0.389 8 0 ✔ - >1K TO Yes 0.593 ? ? Yes 0.660 16 0 ✔ - >1K TO Yes 0.927 ? ? Yes 1.063 32 0 ✔ - >1K TO Yes 1.709 ? ? Yes 2.036

2D Diffusion

4 0 ✔ Yes 1 0.008 NI

Yes 8.523

NI 4 ∞ 90 123.733 0.388 0.908 0.451 8 0 ✔ Yes 1 0.05 NI

Yes 12.461

NI 8 ∞ >1.1K TO TO 16.020 TO

Floyd (5)

4 0 1 0.005 0.020 0.640 TO 0.078 8 0 >1.6K TO 0.116 1.391 TO 0.218 16 0 >1.6K TO 0.128 2.998 TO 0.540 32 0 >1.6K TO 3.836 6.424 TO 2.829 B’mark: Benchmark; #P: Number of Processes, B: Buffering Mode; D: Deadlock Exists ?: Benchmark not supported; NI: Not Invoked

20 runs. TO signifies the time-out after 30 minutes. Note that the number of executions of Hermes also include the runs which were terminated.

[RQ1] We compared Hermes against the state-of-the-art tools - Mopper (a trace verifier), Aislinn and ISP (dynamic verifiers), and CIVL (a stateful sym bolic model checker). We summarize the results in Table 1. On most single-path benchmarks the performance of Hermes is comparable to Mopper and consider ably better than the other state-of-the-art explicit-state model checkers without

compromising on error-reporting.

Evaluation with multi-path programs required us to compare Hermes with all tools except Mopper, since Mopper is constrained to work with only single path programs. The basis for comparing against ISP is the number of times a program is executed while the basis for comparing with other tools is the time taken to complete the verification. The results of our comparison are summa rized in Table 2. On all benchmarks ISP times out for as few as 8 processes.

Aislinn on most benchmarks (barring MatrixMul) either takes longer execution time in comparison with Hermes or times out. The results indicate that when the number of processes increases, the growth in execution time is relatively reasonable in Hermes in comparison with ISP and Aislinn. The scalability of

Hermes regarding number of processes comes from the fact that it prunes out the redundant paths and explores only the feasible ones. CIVL is a powerful and a heavy stateful model checker that can backtrack as soon as it witnesses a visited state. An advantage of CIVL over the other tools is that it can verify pro grams on complex correctness properties over a wide range of inputs. However,

CIVL was consistently slower than Hermes on all benchmarks barring Heat.

The Heat benchmark contained MPI calls that are not supported by CIVL yet.

[RQ2] MPI standard allows flexibility in the ways send calls are buffered. Aislinn buffers send calls if the size of the sent message is not greater than a parameter provided by the user. On the other hand, we follow the approach taken by Siegel

Table 2. Performance comparison for multi-path MPI programs.

B’mark #P B D ISP Aislinn CIVL Hermes Runs Time Time Time Runs Time

Monte (0.15)

4 0 6 6.025 0.971 ? 3 2.326 5 0 24 28.346 1.668 ? 4 3.472 6 0 120 151.598 5.028 ? 5 4.819 8 0 >1.2K TO 10.173 ? 7 7.434

MatrixMul (2 X 2 matrices)

4 ∞ 36 39.669 0.866 17.93 1 7.252 5 ∞ 144 163.277 1.101 25.307 1 9.993 6 ∞ 720 837.633 1.334 48.068 1 12.925 8 ∞ ∼ 1.5K TO 2.206 258.86 1 19.670

Integrate

4 0 27 32.755 0.858 910.36 1 0.206 5 0 256 332.362 3.030 156.82 1 0.302 6 0 3125 TO 27.839 157.63 1 0.497 8 0 >1.5K TO TO 173.27 1 0.852

Workers 
(8 jobs; 
size of job=2) 

4 0 18 20.975 1.549 37.76 1 0.360 5 0 24 28.433 1.368 72.333 1 0.384 6 0 120 151.525 2.286 1027.31 1 0.510 8 0 ∼ 1.3K TO 9.113 TO 1 1.021

B’mark: Benchmark; #P: Number of Processes, B: Buffer Mode; D: Deadlock Exists ?: Benchmark not supported; : Result = null (probably an internal CIVL error: the theorem prover has not said anything) et al. [26] and model the buffer as a limited resource. In other words, send calls use the buffer if it is available. Due to these differences, we cannot compare Hermes with Aislinn in the context of κ-buffer mode. To demonstrate the importance of κ-buffer mode, we ran Hermes on the benchmarks used in [2,31]. Hermes detected the deadlocks when a buffer of size one was provided. The deadlock in the program disappears under zero-buffer and infinite-buffer modes.

### 8 Related Work

Deadlock detection in message passing programs is an active research domain 
with a rich body of literature. There are numerous popular debuggers or pro 
gram correctness checkers which provide features such as monitoring the program 
run [16, 18, 32]. However, they fall short to verify the space of communication 
nondeterminism. 
Predictive trace analysis for multi-threaded C programs is another popular 
area of work. The central idea in these techniques is to encode the thread inter 
leavings of a program execution [34,35]. These techniques rely on the computa 
tion of a symbolic causal relation in the form of a partial order. The work in [34] 
motivated the predictive trace analysis work for MPI, MCAPI, and CSP/CCS 
programs [7, 9, 14, 15, 22]. The encoding presented by Forejt et al. [9] is similar 
to the encoding for a static bounded model checking approach to analyse shared 
memory programs [1] but is restricted to single-path programs. 
Hermes’s contribution on selective program instrumentation is motivated by 
the work in [12], which identified using taint analysis the relevant input sources 
and shared accesses that influence control-flow decisions. The use taint analysis 
to extract input sources and shared accesses is an important step for covering 
relevant program behaviors. 
Marques et al. developed a type-based strategy to statically verify MPI pro 
grams [17, 20]. They verify the annotated MPI program against the protocol 

specifications capturing the behavior of the program using session types. Unlike 
model checking, their approach is not influenced by the number of processes 
and problem size and is insensitive to scalability issues. But they consider only 
deterministic and loop-free programs. 
Concolic Testing (Dynamic Symbolic Execution) combines concrete execu 
tion and symbolic execution [4, 24] to overcome the limitation of SAT/SMT 
solvers when faced with nonlinear constraints. Sherlock [8] is a deadlock detector 
for Java concurrent programs which combines concolic execution with constraint 
solving. While we use SMT encoding to scan through all permissible schedules of 
a path, Sherlock instead permutes the instructions of one schedule to get another 
schedule. A fair comparison of Hermes with concolic execution techniques can 
not be performed since Hermes does not consider every conditional statement 
to be included in the path condition. 
CIVL [19] is an intermediate language to capture concurrency semantics of 
a set of concurrency dialects such as OpenMP, Pthreads, CUDA, and MPI. The 
back-end verifier can statically check properties such as functional correctness, 
deadlocks, and adherence to the rules of the MPI standard. CIVL creates a 
model of the program using symbolic execution and then uses model checking. 
Hermes creates a model of a single path of the program and uses symbolic en 
coding to verify that path of the program. It also uses data-aware analysis to 
prune irrelevant control-flow branches of the program. CIVL does not handle 
non-blocking MPI operations. 
Vakkalanka et al. proposed P OEMSE algorithm [31] to dynamically verify 
MPI programs under a varying buffer capacity of MPI nodes. To this effect they 
employ an enumerative strategy to find a minimal set of culprit sends which, if 
buffered, can cause deadlocks. Siegel had proposed a model checking approach 
where the availability of buffers is encoded in the states of model itself [26]. 
Aislinn [2] is an explicit-state model checker which verifies MPI programs 
with arbitrary-sized system buffers and uses POR to prune the redundant state 
space. Aislinn models the buffer as an unlimited entity and the send calls use 
the buffers when their message size is bigger than a user provided value. 

### 9 Conclusion and Future Work

We combined constraint solving with dynamic verification to discover communi cation deadlocks in multi-path MPI programs. For C/C++ MPI programs, the technique is concretized in a tool Hermes. It formulates an SMT query from the program’s trace by conforming to the MPI runtime semantics and the non deterministic buffer modes provided by MPI implementations. By capturing the flow of data values through communication calls, Hermes restricts the dynamic scheduler to explore a significantly fewer number of traces as compared to the explorations performed by a dynamic verifier. We tested our proposed technique on FEVS test suite and other benchmarks used in past research and found that our technique compares favorably with the state-of-the-art dynamic verification tools. In the future, we plan to focus on ensuring the correctness of MPI programs with collective operations. Currently, we have implemented our tool with the as

sumption that the data which is received in a wildcard receive call and used in a conditional statement is only an integer variable or tag. This is a limitation of the implementation, which we plan to address in future work. However, a more subtle limitation that we impose is that the received data is not modified between the point from where it is received to the point where it is used (in the conditional statement). The constraint was motivated by analysing a large number of bench marks. We, in our experience, did not find that the received data underwent a transformation before it was decoded in a control statement. Note, however, that this limitation can be relaxed by allowing assignment statement in the trace lan guage that we defined in Section 3. Extending the technique on these lines will possibly allow us to analyse a larger and more complex set of MPI programs.

Acknowledgements

This work is partly supported by the Tata Consultancy Services grant and In fosys Centre for Artificial Intelligence at IIIT Delhi. The authors thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable feedback.

### References

1. Alglave, J., Kroening, D., Tautschnig, M.: Partial orders for efficient bounded model checking of concurrent software. In: CAV. Volume 8044 of LNCS., Springer (2013) 141–157 2. B¨ohm, S., Meca, O., Janˇcar, P. In: State-Space Reduction of Non-deterministically Synchronizing Systems Applicable to Deadlock Detection in MPI. Springer Inter national Publishing (2016) 102–118 3. Bucur, S., Ureche, V., Zamfir, C., Candea, G.: Parallel symbolic execution for automated real-world software testing. In: Proceedings of the Sixth Conference on Computer Systems. EuroSys ’11, ACM (2011) 183–198 4. Cadar, C., Dunbar, D., Engler, D.: Klee: Unassisted and automatic generation of high-coverage tests for complex systems programs. In: Proceedings of the 8th USENIX Conference on Operating Systems Design and Implementation. OSDI’08, USENIX Association (2008) 209–224 5. Clang: A C language family frontend for LLVM http://clang.llvm.org/. 6. de Moura, L., Bjørner, N. In: Z3: An Efficient SMT Solver. Springer Berlin Hei delberg, Berlin, Heidelberg (2008) 337–340 7. Elwakil, M., Yang, Z., Wang, L. In: CRI: Symbolic Debugger for MCAPI Appli cations. Springer Berlin Heidelberg (2010) 353–358 8. Eslamimehr, M., Palsberg, J.: Sherlock: Scalable deadlock detection for concurrent programs. In: Proceedings of the 22Nd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering. FSE 2014, ACM (2014) 353–365 9. Forejt, V., Joshi, S., Kroening, D., Narayanaswamy, G., Sharma, S.: Precise pre dictive analysis for discovering communication deadlocks in MPI programs. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. 39(4) (2017) 15:1–15:27 10. Forejt, V., Kroening, D., Narayanaswamy, G., Sharma, S.: Precise predictive anal ysis for discovering communication deadlocks in MPI programs. In: FM 2014: Formal Methods - 19th International Symposium, Singapore, May 12-16, 2014. Proceedings. (2014) 263–278

11. Fu, X., Chen, Z., Yu, H., Huang, C., Dong, W., Wang, J.: Symbolic execution of MPI programs. In: Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Software Engineering - Volume 2. ICSE ’15, IEEE Press (2015) 809–810 
12. Ganai, M., Lee, D., Gupta, A.: Dtam: Dynamic taint analysis of multi-threaded programs for relevancy. In: Proceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT 20th International Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering. FSE ’12 (2012) 46:1–46:11 
13. Gropp, W., Lusk, E., Skjellum, A.: Using MPI (2Nd Ed.): Portable Parallel Pro gramming with the Message-passing Interface. MIT Press (1999) 
14. Huang, Y., Mercer, E. In: Detecting MPI Zero Buffer Incompatibility by SMT Encoding. Springer International Publishing (2015) 219–233 
15. Huang, Y., Mercer, E., McCarthy, J.: Proving MCAPI executions are correct using SMT. In: Proceedings of the 28th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engineering, IEEE (2013) 26–36 
16. Krammer, B., Bidmon, K., M¨uller, M.S., Resch, M.M.: MARMOT: An MPI anal ysis and checking tool. In: PARCO. Advances in Parallel Computing, Elsevier (2003) 
17. L´opez, H.A., Marques, E.R.B., Martins, F., Ng, N., Santos, C., Vasconcelos, V.T., Yoshida, N.: Protocol-based verification of message-passing parallel programs. In: Proceedings of the 2015 ACM SIGPLAN International Conference on Object Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and Applications. OOPSLA 2015, ACM (2015) 280–298 
18. Luecke, G.R., Zou, Y., Coyle, J., Hoekstra, J., Kraeva, M.: Deadlock detection in MPI programs. Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience 14(11) (2002) 911–932 
19. Luo, Z., Zheng, M., Siegel, S.F.: Verification of mpi programs using CIVL. In: Proceedings of the 24th European MPI Users’ Group Meeting. EuroMPI ’17, ACM (2017) 6:1–6:11 
20. Marques, E.R.B., Martins, F., Vasconcelos, V.T., Ng, N., Martins, N.: To wards deductive verification of MPI programs against session types. In: Proceed ings 6th Workshop on Programming Language Approaches to Concurrency and Communication-cEntric Software, PLACES 2013. (2013) 103–113 
21. MPI: A message-passing interface standard version 3.1 http://mpi-forum.org/ docs/mpi-3.1/. 
22. Narayanaswamy, G.: When truth is efficient: Analysing concurrency. In: Pro ceedings of the 2015 International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. ISSTA 2015, ACM (2015) 141–152 
23. Sato, K., Ahn, D.H., Laguna, I., Lee, G.L., Schulz, M., Chambreau, C.M.: Noise in jection techniques to expose subtle and unintended message races. In: Proceedings of the 22Nd ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming. PPoPP ’17 (2017) 89–101 
24. Sen, K., Marinov, D., Agha, G.: Cute: A concolic unit testing engine for c. In: Proceedings of the 10th European Software Engineering Conference Held Jointly with 13th ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering. ESEC/FSE-13 (2005) 263–272 
25. Sharma, S.V., Gopalakrishnan, G., Kirby, R.M.: A survey of MPI related debuggers and tools. (2007) 
26. Siegel, S.F. In: Efficient Verification of Halting Properties for MPI Programs with Wildcard Receives. Springer Berlin Heidelberg (2005) 413–429 
27. Siegel, S.F., Zirkel, T.K.: Fevs: A functional equivalence verification suite for high performance scientific computing. Mathematics in Computer Science (Dec 2011) 427–435 

28. Siegel, S.F., Zirkel, T.K.: TASS: the toolkit for accurate scientific software. Math ematics in Computer Science 5(4) (2011) 395–426 
29. Vakkalanka, S.: Efficient Dynamic Verification Algorithms for MPI Applications. PhD thesis (2010) 
30. Vakkalanka, S., Gopalakrishnan, G., Kirby, R.M. In: Dynamic Verification of MPI Programs with Reductions in Presence of Split Operations and Relaxed Orderings. Springer Berlin Heidelberg (2008) 66–79 
31. Vakkalanka, S., Vo, A., Gopalakrishnan, G., Kirby, R.M. In: Precise Dynamic Analysis for Slack Elasticity: Adding Buffering without Adding Bugs. Springer Berlin Heidelberg (2010) 152–159 
32. Vetter, J.S., de Supinski, B.R.: Dynamic software testing of mpi applications with umpire. In: Proceedings of the 2000 ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing. SC ’00, IEEE Computer Society (2000) 
33. Vo, A., Aananthakrishnan, S., Gopalakrishnan, G., Supinski, B.R.d., Schulz, M., Bronevetsky, G.: A scalable and distributed dynamic formal verifier for mpi pro grams. In: Proceedings of the 2010 ACM/IEEE International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis. SC ’10, IEEE Com puter Society (2010) 1–10 
34. Wang, C., Kundu, S., Ganai, M.K., Gupta, A.: Symbolic predictive analysis for concurrent programs. In: FM 2009: Formal Methods, Second World Congress, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, November 2-6, 2009. Proceedings. (2009) 256–272 
35. Wang, C., Limaye, R., Ganai, M., Gupta, A.: Trace-based symbolic analysis for atomicity violations. In: Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Tools and Algorithms for the Construction and Analysis of Systems. TACAS’10 (2010) 328–342 
36. Xue, R., Liu, X., Wu, M., Guo, Z., Chen, W., Zheng, W., Zhang, Z., Voelker, G.: Mpiwiz: Subgroup reproducible replay of mpi applications. In: Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming. PPoPP ’09 (2009) 251–260 

