DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATICS
TECHNISCHE UNIVERSITÄT MÜNCHEN
Bachelor’s Thesis in Informatics
Dynamic Resource Management
Using MPI Sessions on p4est
Maximilian Streubel

DEPARTMENT OF INFORMATICS
TECHNISCHE UNIVERSITÄT MÜNCHEN
Bachelor’s Thesis in Informatics
Dynamic Resource Management
Using MPI Sessions on p4est
Dynamische Ressourcenverwaltung
mit MPI Sessions in p4est
Author: Maximilian Streubel
Supervisor: Prof. Dr. Martin Schulz
Advisor: Prof. Dr. Martin Schreiber
Submission Date: September 13, 2020
I confirm that this bachelor’s thesis in informatics is my own work and I have documented all sources and material used.
Munich, September 13, 2020 Maximilian Streubel
Acknowledgements
I would particularly like to thank Martin Schreiber for his ongoing support over the
last months. Only his helpful advice despite his numerous other duties made this thesis
what it is now.
Special thanks goes to the Leibnitz-Rechenzentrum who gave me the possibility to
evaluate my work on their Linux Cluster.
Finally, I would like to thank my family and friends for their unconditional support.

Abstract
Dynamic resource adaptation can bring great benefits to the utilization and thus the
throughput of high performance clusters. For this, applications can change the resources
used in order to adapt to both a varying overall workload on the system, caused by
starting and terminating of other jobs, and changes in the own workload, like they can
be observed with simulations on adaptive meshes.
The most recent development towards making fully adaptive applications possible
was the standardization of the MPI Sessions model in the MPI 4.0 standard. In order to
use this model for dynamic resource management, the user application has to be written
around this concept, and the software libraries used have to support the migration of
application data to different sets of processes.
This thesis introduces an interface to the p4est library for parallel adaptive mesh
refinement that enables the user to add or remove processes to or from the grid, and
to directly replace the MPI communicator used. Also, it provides a reference implementation for this functionality, adding full support for dynamic resource adaptation to
p4est.
These adaptation procedures are used to write example simulations demonstrating
dynamic resource management on an adaptive grid. For this, the MPI Sessions model
is used through the libmpidynres simulation layer, which is extended by provisional
functions for performing resource changes defined by the user application.
Finally, the performance of the extensions made to p4est are evaluated for different
resource management approaches and grid refinement patterns. The results show that
the additional overhead for dynamic resource management is very low, and thus confirm
the advantages of dynamic applications.
v

Contents
Acknowledgments iii
Abstract v
1. Introduction 1
1.1. Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.1.1. Applications: Static Workload . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.1.2. Applications: Dynamic Workload . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.1.3. MPI Sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.2. Thesis Goals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2. Related Work 7
2.1. The p4est Library for Parallel Adaptive Mesh Refinement . . . . . . . . . 7
2.1.1. General Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.1.2. Functionality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.2. Different Approaches for Dynamic Resource Management . . . . . . . . . 14
2.3. MPI Sessions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.3.1. MPI 4.0 Standard Specification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2.3.2. The libmpidynres Simulation Layer for MPI Sessions . . . . . . . . 18
3. Realization with Standalone p4est 21
3.1. Emulating Dynamic Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
3.2. Application View on Resource Change with p4est . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
3.2.1. Adding Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
3.2.2. Removing Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
3.2.3. Replacing the MPI Communicator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
3.3. Changes to p4est . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
3.3.1. Adding Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
3.3.2. Removing Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
3.3.3. Replacing the MPI Communicator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
4. Realization with libmpidynres and p4est 35
5. Evaluation 41
5.1. Test Suite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.2. Example Application: SWE on p4est . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
5.2.1. Structure and Functionality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
vii
Contents
5.2.2. Performance Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
5.2.3. Benchmark Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
5.3. Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
6. Conclusion and Future Work 61
A. Software Development Aspects 63
A.1. Software Tools Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A.2. Hardware Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A.3. Code Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
B. Usage 65
B.1. Compiling and Installing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
B.1.1. p4est . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
B.1.2. libmpidynres . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
B.1.3. Example Applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
B.2. Executing the Example Code . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
B.2.1. Examples . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
B.2.2. Benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
B.2.3. Test Suite . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
Bibliography 69
viii
1. Introduction
1.1. Motivation
Most computer programs are highly dynamic systems with requirements for computing
resources and memory varying over time. This is especially the case when it comes
to high performance computing (HPC) applications, such as simulations of partial
differential equations (PDEs) on adaptive grids. If these programs are assigned fixed
resources at startup time, they will at some point either have too many resources
reserved so they can not fully utilize all of them, or they will run out of resources and
therefore need more computation time than necessary. Due to the dynamic requirements
of the software, it is even likely that the same program will encounter both of these
situations at different times.
A possible approach to avoiding this problem is to change the assigned resources
as the requirements of the program change. In the common HPC setting where multiple programs are running on a large supercomputer, such dynamic programs are in
advantage over static applications mainly in two situations.
1.1.1. Applications: Static Workload
Large supercomputers are only rarely used by single programs. In most cases, many
programs will share the resources of the computer by reserving only a smaller part of
all available cores. Because of this, even programs that do not have varying resource
requirements can profit from using dynamic resources and contribute to improving the
overall system utilization [20].
If the overall workload on the supercomputer decreases, for example when some
programs terminate, these resources can be used by other applications running on the
system. Programs that always have a constant workload can use the additional cores to
decrease their workload per core and thus reduce their total computation time. This also
minimizes the idle time of the released cores, and therefore assures a good utilization of
the available computational power of the system [20].
Once new applications are started and the workload on the system increases, the
program can release these resources again to make them available for other tasks.
This makes it possible to schedule new applications earlier, and thus reach a higher
throughput. The increased execution time of the applications whose resources were
reduced is compensated by the lower waiting time until the application is scheduled, so
that the total time from the submission to the completion of a job is reduced [20]. This
1
1. Introduction
kind of resource stealing can also be used when executing applications with different
priorities.
Dynamic resource management can also be used for replacing already allocated
cores with other ones. This is useful for maintaining locality in programs working
with varying resources, and is also applicable for reacting to changes in the available
resources in the rest of the system. If during startup the program had to be launched
on nodes that are located at different parts of the supercomputer, or resources have
been added on more distant nodes during the execution, the missing locality can have
a great performance impact on all communication operations. When resources are
released by other programs so that it becomes possible to allocate the same number of
cores in a more local environment, these resources can be replaced by moving from the
more distant cores to the newly available closer ones and thus defragment the program,
increasing the locality and thereby the application performance. This requires additional
information about the network topology and the availability of resources.
1.1.2. Applications: Dynamic Workload
Many applications in scientific computing can be solved more efficiently using adaptive
grids, for example the simulation of seismic waves [4] or other wave propagation
problems [3]. The general idea of this approach is to alter the refinement of the grid
used for space discretization depending on the current change in the state of a grid cell.
As the workload of such a simulation mainly depends on the number of cells, changing
the refinement of the grid leads to high changes in the workload. If the resource
requirements of a program change after refining or coarsening the grid, the allocation of
cores for the program could be altered in order to fit the new requirements.
The first possible case here is a temporary increase of the programs workload. Here,
assigning additional resources to the program can help to keep the workload on every
core at an acceptable level and therefore decrease the required computation time by
increasing the level of parallelism.
If the workload decreases during execution, the program may at some point hold
more resources than it can utilize. If the level of parallelization is too high, it is likely that
the additional overhead annihilates the performance gain, or even decreases the overall
performance. In this case, it causes only low cost or is even positive for the required
computation time to release these resources. Moreover, this makes them available
to other programs, and can therefore help to improve the utilization of the available
computational power and increase the overall throughput of the system.
Although these two cases already state the main use of dynamic resource management
for programs with dynamic workload, another possible application can be found by
combining both allocating and releasing of resources at the same time. Coming back
to the example of a simulation of PDEs on an adaptive grid, it can happen that at
some time on one side of the domain the grid is refined, and on the other side it is
coarsened simultaneously. Although the desired workload per core could be achieved
by repartitioning the grid over the processes, this requires sending a large number of
2
1.1. Motivation
cells over the network, so it can reduce the required amount of communication and be
of advantage for the locality of adjacent grid cells to allocate different cores at places
where they are needed. This again requires exact knowledge of the network topology
and the physical location of the allocated nodes.
Another important use case for replacing existing resources arises when application
specific hardware is used. By replacing general purpose nodes with application specific
ones only when their functionality is actually needed, for example when using hardware
specialized on calculating cryptographic functions, one can drastically improve the
performance of the program. At the same time, allocating special purpose hardware
only when necessary reduces the idle time of those nodes and makes them accessible to
more programs.
1.1.3. MPI Sessions
The necessary flexibility required for running an application on resources changing
during runtime is provided by the MPI Sessions interface, which was first proposed by
Jeff Squyres in 2016 [31] and is part of the MPI 4.0 standard [23]. It provides a new way
of managing the resources used by a program, allowing the user application to integrate
dynamically allocated or freed resources into the application during runtime.
In order to make use of the new possibilities arising from this interface once it will
be available in production environments and also for evaluating its current state of
development, applications built around this concept of dynamically changing resources
are necessary.
These programs have to be able to react to dynamic changes in their workload by
automatically requesting new resources from the MPI runtime environment whenever
the workload increases, and releasing them to the runtime once they are no longer
necessary. This requires an additional component tracking the current workload on
every core and the complete system in order to decide on the resource change. This
decision can be influenced by the user application by submitting optimization hints to
the underlying resource manager. Finally, the execution can be adapted using the MPI
Sessions environment in order to utilize all added resources and terminate all processes
running on nodes that should be released.
In order to adapt the running application to the changed resources, the execution state
on new processes has to be synchronized with the original application, and data from
released resources has to be moved from them and distributed over the other processes
appropriately. For the example of a simulation on an adaptive grid, this requires
initializing the grid on new resources, distributing the cells from the removed resources
over the rest of the application, and moving the cell data to their new destination, while
keeping the refinement pattern of the grid unchanged and preserving locality of adjacent
grid cells. Also, the simulation state consisting of e.g. the current simulation time and
output file paths needs to be synchronized.
While the latter synchronizations must be done by the main simulation engine, the
former modifications require low-level access to the implementation of the grid and
3
1. Introduction
therefore have to be integrated in the library for adaptive mesh refinement used. As a
consequence, the new mechanisms brought by dynamic resource management and MPI
Sessions can only be used if the final application as well as the libraries used are built
around this concept.
1.2. Thesis Goals
This thesis aims to integrating the mechanisms required for using dynamic resource
management into the p4est library for parallel adaptive mesh refinement on forests of
octrees [4], and building a reference application using an MPI Sessions environment for
dynamic resource management on a simulation using adaptive grids with p4est.
The required modifications to the p4est library can be derived from the main use
cases for dynamic resource management: Adding new resources to a program, removing
the ones no longer needed, and replacing resources with others.
It is clear that the first two operations can replace the third one by removing resources
and adding the replacements separately, and the third function already provides the
functionality of the others by replacing no resources with newly allocated ones or
replacing existing resources with nothing. Nevertheless, all three functions will be
implemented in this thesis in order to provide a most flexible interface and improve the
performance of the pure adding and removing functionality.
The p4est library for adaptive mesh refinement provides, among others, functions
for creating, refining, coarsening, balancing, partitioning, and iterating over adaptive
grids based on forests of quadtrees or octrees in a parallel environment. In this work,
the library will be extended by functions providing the functionality described above.
This thesis will focus on compatibility with the concept of MPI Sessions as specified
in the MPI 4.0 standard [23]. As there is no complete implementation of MPI supporting this model, in this work the simulation layer libmpidynres [11] will be used to
implement dynamic resource allocation at the level of the user program. As this library
previously only supported resource changes proposed by the runtime environment, but
did not allow the user application to request specific resource changes as it would be
required for dynamic resource management controlled by the user, the resource manager
of libmpidynres will be extended by functionality for adding or removing a specific
number of processes according to user requests.
A complete implementation would contain more functionality, like the possibility to
replace resources with others or to influence the order of the allocated resources for
preserving locality. As this thesis only uses this library for demonstrating the usage of
the MPI Sessions interface for resource management of an application with dynamic
workload and focuses on the user application itself and the libraries used by it, only
this basic functionality is added, although it will be replaced by more powerful and
flexible functions for passing optimization hints to the resource manager in a real-world
production environment.
For evaluating the extensions made to p4est, they are tested using a complete test
4
1.2. Thesis Goals
suite based on simple integer calculations on small grids while switching between
different subsets of a fixed number of statically allocated resources. For demonstration
purposes a larger simulation will be used, calculating the shallow water equations on
an adaptive grid with dynamically changing resources using the extended p4est library
and the extended functionality of libmpidynres.
Finally, the effects of dynamic resource management on the performance and efficiency of the user application is evaluated by comparing benchmark results of nine
combinations of different grid refinement and resource utilization approaches, either
running on different subsets of a fixed number of processes or using libmpidynres.
5

2. Related Work
2.1. The p4est Library for Parallel Adaptive Mesh Refinement
The p4est library created by C. Burstedde et al. [4, 5] is a parallel library for adaptive
mesh refinement based on a forest of quadtrees or octrees. It uses the libsc library
shipped with p4est for data organization in a parallel environment.
2.1.1. General Structure
The grid is organized in a main object, called the p4est. This structure contains
administrative information about the grid, like the MPI communicator and associated
information, the indices of the first and last tree in the forest which are located on the
current process, the local and global number of cells, and the index of the first cell on
this process. The indices describe the partitioning of the grid over all processes in the
MPI communicator and are used for the load balancing mechanisms.
Apart from this management information, the p4est structure contains a pointer
to not further specified data that can be used freely by the user program in order
to make global application data accessible from within the p4est functions, and the
actual grid. The latter consists of the forest, organized as an array of quad- or octrees,
depending on the number of dimensions of the user application. Apart from this it
contains administrative fields like memory pools for temporary cells and the data stored
inside the grid. All arrays and memory pools are implemented using the libsc library
for scientific computing, which is shipped with p4est and provides helper functions
mainly for memory organization.
The trees themselves are data structures containing an array with the cells from this
tree, called the quadrants, and further administrative information, especially the indices
of the first and last quadrants of the tree that are stored by the local process, and
the number of quadrants on every refinement level. The quadrants in turn consist of
their coordinates in the grid, their refinement level, and a pointer to another structure
containing the user data.
Throughout this structure, the quadrants and the user data associated with them
are not stored directly in their parent data structures, but in external memory pools.
The mapping from the grid structure to the single quadrants, as well as the complete
tree structure including leaves at different levels, is determined by the order of the
data inside the memory pools. For this, the z-order is used. Together with storing
the refinement level for every quadrant, the tree structure can be reconstructed only
from the ordering of the quadrants, what makes it unnecessary to store pointers to
7
2. Related Work
single quadrants inside the trees, and thus reduces the size of the p4est structure while
improving the locality of adjacent quadrants.
The topology of the different trees in the forest, including possible periodic boundary conditions, is specified using a connectivity structure. This structure contains
information about the number of trees in the forest and their neighborhood relations.
An overview of the p4est tree structure is shown in Figure 2.1. For the rest of this
thesis, instead of the term “quadrant” which is used by p4est, the more common name
“cell” will be used, except if explicitly referring to the data structure.
2.1.2. Functionality
Apart from the grid structure, p4est provides all necessary functions for manipulating
the grid and iterating over the cells. Most functions come with two different interfaces:
One using only the necessary parameters, and an extended version accepting additional
arguments that give more control to the user or expose more functionality. The most
important functions are described in this section. An overview over all operations on
the grid is shown in Figure 2.2.
Ghost layers In order to synchronize the quadrant data across the borders of the
trees and processes and to implement boundary conditions, p4est supports creating
and exchanging ghost layers. These are implemented as a dedicated data structure,
containing information about the position of the ghost cell and the cell mirrored by it,
and an array containing the ghost quadrants themselves. These are a special kind of
quadrants that mirror the values of real cells from another tree or process, or values of
cells on the opposite edge of the grid for periodic boundary conditions.
For managing these ghost layers, p4est provides a function for creating the ghost layer
structure from a given grid using a given connectivity. This function, which allocates
the data structure and fills it with values from the boundaries of the set of quadrants
on the local process. Hereby, the ghost layer structure only represents the mapping of
ghost quadrants to real quadrants, but not the actual cell data. This data is stored in an
extra array, the ghost data array, which has to be allocated by the user. After creating
the ghost layer, the ghost structure contains the indices of the quadrants corresponding
to every ghost quadrant inside the ghost data array.
Another function is used for exchanging the ghost layers between the processes
according to the topology of the p4est. This function also fills the ghost data array with
the corresponding cell values, so they can be used by the application. The ghost layer
structure stays valid as long as the grid structure stays the same, i.e., the refinement
pattern and the partitioning over the processes are not changed. The ghost data on the
other hand has to change after every change to the cell data. This means that this data
has to be exchanged after every iteration of the simulation, while the ghost structure
can be left unchanged until the next adaptation of the grid. This is made possible by the
separation of structure and content of the ghost layer.
8
2.1. The p4est Library for Parallel Adaptive Mesh Refinement
Tree 0 Tree 1
0 1 2 3
6 7 8 9
4 5 10
Refinement level
0
1
2
p4est
(Main structure, forest of quadtrees)
Cell ID
Refinement level
Tree 0
0
1
1
1
3
1
2
1
Tree 1
4
1
5
1
6
2
7
2
8
2
9
2
10
1
0 1
2 3
4 5
6 7
8 9
10
Figure 2.1.: Structure of a p4est grid. On top is the actual internal representation as an
array of trees containing arrays of cells, below the tree representation and
on the bottom the final grid. The colored lines in the grid at the bottom
indicate the z-order used to store the cells.
9
2. Related Work
4
5
0 1
2 3
6
4
6
7 8
11
9 10
12
0
2
1
3
4 5
8
6 7
9
0
5
6
7 8
11
9 10
12
1 2
3 4
0
5
6
7 8
11
9 10
12
1 2
3 4
2x refine
1)
coarsen
rebalance
repartition
0 1
2 3
5
2)
3) 4)
5)
Figure 2.2.: One adaptation cycle of a grid using p4est. The numbers inside the grid
show the indices of the cells in the quadrant array, the z-order is indicated
by the blue dotted lines, and the coloring of the cells represents the process
owning this cell.
The first grid represents the initial state as created by previous adaptations.
This grid is then refined by calling the refinement function twice, resulting
in the second grid. Next, the coarsening function is used to obtain the
third grid. As the bottom edge of cell number one now violates the balance
invariant, it is split up during the rebalancing operation. Finally, the grid
is repartitioned in order to reach an equal distribution of the cells over all
processes.
10
2.1. The p4est Library for Parallel Adaptive Mesh Refinement
When iterating over the grid, the ghost quadrants are passed to the user if necessary.
The user can check whether a specific quadrant is a ghost quadrant, and if this is the
case, the cell mirrored by the ghost can be retrieved from the ghost data array using the
index stored in the ghost structure.
Iterating over the grid The p4est library provides functions for iterating over all cells
of the grid, in this context called the volumes, and all faces, edges, and corners of the
cells touching up to eight cells in the three-dimensional case. The user can provide up
to four callback functions, which are called by p4est on every volume, face, edge, or
corner, respectively. For two-dimensional scenarios, there are no callbacks for the edges
between cells, as these only exist for three-dimensional grids.
Hereby, p4est maintains some invariants regarding the order of the callbacks. First,
the iterating function traverses the grid in z-order, so they iterate linearly over the
quadrant pool, leading to good cache efficiency. Second, the callback functions for faces
between two cells are only called after the functions for all adjacent cell volumes have
been executed. Similar holds for the faces, edges, and corners.
The callback functions are passed special structures for the parts of the grid they
iterate over, i.e. volumes, faces, edges, or corners. While they need not be described
here in detail, they all share a common basic structure. The main elements are the p4est
object and the ghost layer, as well as an array containing all adjacent cells. Apart from
this, the iteration information structure contains values indicating the orientation of
the edge or face and showing whether the current cell is located at the boundary of a
tree. The latter can be checked by the user in order to take appropriate actions for the
boundary conditions, unless periodic boundaries are used, which are handled by the
ghost layer.
An additional parameter for the callback functions is a user pointer that can be
specified in the iteration function. This pointer can be used for passing the ghost data
array, but also for application specific data global to the grid. If both the ghost data
and additional user data should be used, they have to be wrapped in a new structure
and extracted again inside the callback functions. This provides an easy way of making
application data available from within the callback functions. Alternatively, this can be
achieved using the user pointer of the p4est structure.
Refining and coarsening the grid The main functionality of p4est is to dynamically
adapt the grid. This is done by two separate functions for refining and coarsening.
If a cell is refined, it is split into four or eight new cells of a higher refinement level,
depending on the number of dimensions. Coarsening represents the reverse operation
of merging four or eight cells to a single new one with a lower refinement level. This is
only possible on sibling cells, which are cells that have been created from one parent
cell by refining. Therefore, only cells on the same refinement level can be coarsened.
The cells that should be changed are determined by user-defined callback functions.
These take as parameters the cell that could be refined or the set of sibling cells that
11
2. Related Work
could be coarsened, and return a boolean value deciding on whether the corresponding
operation will be performed.
The coarsening and refinement functions iterate over the grid, apply the decision
functions to all cells, and adapt the grid as necessary. The resulting new cells can
be initialized in two different ways: First, by passing an initialization function to the
adaptation function, which will set the user data independently of the old cells, and
second, by passing a replacement function that will initialize the new cells based on
the data in the old cells. Both the initialization and the replacement function have to be
provided by the user, and the replacement function can only be used with the extended
interface.
By default, the grid is only refined or coarsened by one level, so the adaptation
functions have to be called iteratively if higher change of the grid is desired. This can be
changed by setting a flag in the parameters for the refinement and coarsening functions,
which forces recursive refinement or coarsening of cells until no more action needs to be
taken according to the provided decision functions.
Rebalancing the grid Some operations, like iterating over the grid, require the grid to
be balanced, meaning that the difference in the refinement level of two cells sharing a
face may not be greater than one, or in other words, every cell may be adjacent to at
most two smaller cells on every side, or four for three dimensional grids. The same
principle can also be applied to the corners between cells, in which case we speak of
corner balance. While the latter is almost never required for the functionality of the grid,
it leads to a smoother refinement pattern.
In order to assure that these conditions are fulfilled, p4est provides a rebalancing
function which has to be called after every adaptation of the grid. It performs some
corrective refinement by splitting cells that would violate the above invariant. Like with
the refinement function, the new cell data can either be initialized using an initialization
function which is independent of the old cell, or using a replacement function through
the extended interface.
As the balance created by this function is needed for doing further work on the
grid, it has to be called after every adaptation of the grid. Yet, this is not required for
further refining or coarsening, so if the adaptation functions are applied iteratively or
recursively, it only has to be called once after the last change.
Repartitioning the grid Adapting the grid can create high differences in the refinement
level in different regions of the domain, what leads to an unbalanced workload over
the different processes. In order to keep the workload approximately equally divided,
the distribution of the cells over all processes should be changed after every larger
adaptation of the grid. This can be done using the repartitioning function.
To this function a weighting function defined by the user can be passed, which is
called for every cell and assigns it a weight. The repartitioning function then collects
the weights of all cells on all processes and determines how to split the grid in order
12
2.1. The p4est Library for Parallel Adaptive Mesh Refinement
to achieve an even distribution of the cell weights over the processes. As the cells are
internally stored in a linear array sorted in z-order, the current partitioning can be easily
described by the indices of the first and last cells on every process. Due to the ordering
of the cells, this also preserves the locality of adjacent grid cells.
After communicating the local weight distribution to all processes, the function
determines these limits and sends them to the other parts of the grid. As the final steps,
the neighbor processes with which the cells will be exchanged are determined, before
sending the actual cell data to their new destination. These last steps are delegated
to an extra function, called p4est_partition_given, which, given the desired target
distribution of the cells, performs the communication of the cell data and updates the
p4est main structure.
The repartitioning function can also be called without specifying a weight function.
In this case, the grid is partitioned according to the number of cells on every process,
corresponding to a weight function assigning the same weight to every cell.
Internal functions used during this thesis Apart from the main functionality, p4est
provides many more functions for adapting and managing the grid. Of special interest
are the following functions, which are used by p4est to implement the core functionality
and also by the functions added during this thesis.
The first two functions are used for manipulating the MPI environment of the p4est,
and called p4est_comm_parallel_env_assign and p4est_comm_parallel_env_replace.
They implement assigning and changing all MPI-related fields in the p4est structure.
For this, they set the MPI communicator and retrieve and assign the MPI size and MPI
rank for every process. The replacing function also frees the old communicator.
The function p4est_connectivity_bcast is used to distribute a given connectivity
structure to all processes in a given communicator and will be used in this work for
synchronizing the connectivity after adding processes to the grid.
The p4est_partition_given function was already briefly introduced above. It sends
and receives cells of the grid from other processes in order to reach the partitioning that
is given as a list of cell numbers in the parameters. This will be used for moving cells
away from processes that will be removed from the grid.
Also for removing processes, the function p4est_comm_parallel_env_reduce is useful.
This function adapts the p4est structure so that all processes containing no cells are
removed. This includes identifying the empty processes, changing the process indices in
the partitioning scheme, and creating and assigning the new MPI communicator.
Finally, p4est contains a function for assessing the validity of the p4est structure,
p4est_is_valid. This function is called at the end of every adaptation function in order
to assure that the performed changes left the grid in a valid state.
13
2. Related Work
2.2. Different Approaches for Dynamic Resource Management
Applications supporting dynamic resource adaptation require additional mechanisms
for retrieving resource changes from a runtime environment. This environment must
be able to allocate and release resources, and handle spawning and termination of the
user application. Also, it has to decide on the resource changes performed, based on
optimization hints passed by the user applications, the global utilization of the system,
and the jobs queued for scheduling.
The most basic and also the most common approach for adapting the resources used
by an application is to write and read checkpoint files. These contain all important
data from the affected processes and can be used to reconstruct their state after their
termination. For adapting the number of processes of an application with this technique,
processes can be split in order to add resources or merged in order to remove them.
Hereby, the old processes write their current state to a checkpoint file on the hard disk,
and then terminate. After that, the new processes that should replace the old ones are
started and reload the application state from the checkpoint files.
In order to restart the new processes, an additional runtime environment is required,
which triggers the resource changes and spawns the new processes. This technique
was presented by El Maghraoui et al. in their PCM library [10], which performs the
tasks described above. For deciding on resource changes, it uses a daemon process to
monitor the resource utilization of all applications, and takes the number and size of
programs waiting to be scheduled into account. This allows the runtime environment
to perform resource stealing in order to start pending programs earlier, or to expand
running applications in order to speed up their execution.
The main drawback of the checkpoint / reload mechanism is the low performance
of writing and reading to and from the hard disk. This was circumvented by Gupta et
al., who eliminated the need for external memory access by using the shared memory
of the Linux operating system (SHM) instead, what increases the performance of the
resource changes drastically [17].
The need for writing checkpoints can be eliminated completely if processes are not
split or merged, but new processes are added or removed. In this case the application
state can be transferred from the other processes directly. The steps for adding resources
to the application this way are as follows: First, a new application is started in order
to allocate additional resources. This application then terminates without releasing the
allocated resources, which can then be integrated into the original program by spawning
new processes on them. For removing resources, single processes of the application
can terminate, what requires additional synchronization with the rest of the application
in order to prevent the program from crashing due to MPI communicators becoming
invalid.
Both increasing and decreasing the number of resources requires collaboration with the
underlying resource manager, which has to keep the resources of terminated processes
allocated for the main application and change the ownership of the resources. The
required extensions have been made to different resource managers, like the slurm
14
2.3. MPI Sessions
workload manager [20] and the Torque resource manager with the Maui scheduler [21].
Both implementations use similar techniques for scheduling and for deciding on resource
changes, allowing the user to specify the minimum, maximum, and desired number of
processes for their applications and deciding based on the overall system utilization and
the jobs queued for scheduling.
The same principle for resource change mechanisms with a different scheduling
approach was presented by Sudarsan and Ribbens in the ReSHAPE framework [32],
who introduced the application performance as an additional decision factor. The idea
behind this is that every application should use the number of processes that brings ideal
performance. For this, a performance profiler collects performance information for every
application between two resource adaptation cycles and uses this data to find the ideal
configuration for every program, which in turn influences the decision on the performed
resource changes. A similar approach that extends the collected performance data by
using hardware performance counters is implemented in the FLEX_MPI extension of
the MPI environment [17].
All approaches mentioned above rely on the MPI_Comm_spawn function for starting
new processes. However, this function has several disadvantages. The most important
one concerns the fault tolerance, as this function does not include any error handling
functionality. Moreover, it creates a new world communicator containing only the newly
spawned processes, what means that different processes of the same applications have
different world communicators [35]. This violates the basic principle of the MPI world
model, and some implementations of MPI do not even support this function for the
reasons mentioned above. An alternative approach circumventing the strict limitations
of the MPI world model are MPI Sessions, which are explained in the following section.
2.3. MPI Sessions
Using dynamic resource management with MPI requires additional functionality for
dynamically spawning and terminating processes. A very flexible approach to make
this possible are MPI Sessions, which are part of the new MPI 4.0 standard [23]. By
now, no implementation is available that supports the complete MPI Sessions standard.
Because of this, the simulation layer libmpidynres [11] will be used instead.
2.3.1. MPI 4.0 Standard Specification
The official specification of the MPI Sessions interface is part of the MPI 4.0 standard.
The concept behind MPI Sessions is an alternative approach to process initialization
and finalization that is meant to be a replacement for the world model used in previous
standards.
The world model only allows to initialize the MPI runtime once on every process and
does not support initializing MPI again after it has been finalized [18]. Moreover, all
processes must be known during initialization. When calling the MPI_Init function,
15
2. Related Work
a world communicatoris created, which contains all processes and is used to create
other communicators to work on. As MPI communicators are immutable, it is not
easily possible to add new processes later during runtime. Similarly, terminating one
process makes the MPI world communicator invalid, and therefore usually leads to the
termination of the complete application.
These problems are solved by the MPI Sessions model by eliminating the need
for a global world communicator. Instead, it introduces the new concept of an MPI
Session handle, which is the base object for all kinds of process management operations. The MPI_Init and MPI_Finalize functions are replaced by MPI_Session_init and
MPI_Session_finalize, which construct or destruct a new MPI Session handle. These
functions can be called without synchronization with other processes, especially not all
processes have to be initialized at the same time, and processes may call the initialization
function again after finalizing a session.
The processes are organized in a new structure called process sets. As the name
suggests, these represent a set of processes, which in turn can be used to create new
communicators. Initially, several process sets are created. All processes that are spawned
during startup time are contained in the mpi://WORLD process set, which serves as a
starting point for creating new communicators. Additionally, every process has its
own process set, which contains only one element and is called mpi://SELF. Further
process sets can be defined by the runtime environment, for example to structure the
processes by the physical nodes they are running on, or to separate different parts of the
application. Yet, the standard specification only makes the two process sets mentioned
above mandatory. All process sets follow the URI naming format, where the mpi://
name space is reserved for process sets defined by the MPI standard. The complete
structure of the process sets is shown in Figure 2.3.
After initializing the MPI Sessions handle, the user can query it for the environment, consisting of all process sets a process is part of. This is done by calling the
MPI_Session_get_num_psets function, which returns the number of process sets containing the calling process and a list of their names. The process sets themselves can
be retrieved using the MPI_Session_get_nth_pset function, which will return the name
and length of the requested process set. The MPI Sessions standard also allows the
user to access additional information associated with every process set and the MPI Session itself, using the functions MPI_Session_get_info and MPI_Session_get_pset_info.
These functions return MPI_Info objects that can contain arbitrary key-value pairs specified by the user and some values provided by the MPI implementation. The only key
that is specified by the MPI standard is the mpi_size key of the process set information
object, which contains the length of the corresponding process set.
This information can be used to create MPI groups from the process sets. This is
done using the function MPI_Group_from_session_pset, which returns an MPI_Group
object containing all processes from a specified process set. This MPI_Group can be used
to create other groups, as known from the previous MPI standards. After a group
containing the desired processes was created, an MPI communicator can be generated
16
2.3. MPI Sessions
Figure 2.3.: Process set structure for an example application consisting of five processes.
In this example, apart from the mandatory mpi://WORLD and mpi://SELF
additional process sets are defined for structuring by the physical topology
and different parts of the application. [23]
from it using the function MPI_Comm_create_from_group, which works similar to the
MPI_Comm_create function. The intermediate steps leading from the MPI Session to an
MPI communicator are shown in Figure 2.4.
By starting not with a world communicator, but with multiple process sets which
can be used to create only the necessary MPI communicators, this approach does not
have the limitations of the world model, especially, processes may be added or removed
without making the base object invalid.
The MPI Sessions model only specifies the procedure for initializing MPI in a flexible
way. Although this is not part of the MPI standard, it can be used for dynamic resource
management as well. In this case, the actual allocation and releasing of resources is
done by an external resource manager. These resource managers could be extended to
provide an interface through which the user application can submit optimization hints
that tell the resource manager when to add or remove processes of an application. An
example for a resource manager is the slurm workload manager, for which the necessary
extensions for dynamic resource management already have been made [7].
When the resources of the user program are adapted, the new processes can call the
MPI_Session_init function to create new process sets such as their own mpi://SELF and
a new global set containing all processes after the resource change. Using the procedure
described above, this process set can be retrieved by the application and used to create a
new MPI communicator to which the application can then be migrated. Finally, some
processes can call the MPI_Session_finalize function and terminate without disturbing
the rest of the program, thus completing the resource change.
17
2. Related Work
Figure 2.4.: Procedure for creating an MPI communicator under the sessions model.
Starting with the MPI Session handle, the process sets can be retrieved from
the runtime environment. These can be used to create MPI groups, from
which the user can construct MPI communicators. [26]
An important thing to note here is that the process sets themselves are immutable.
This is why a new global process set is created for every resource change, which also
means that the mpi://WORLD process set is never changed. Instead, after adding resources
to the application, there is a new global process set, and the mpi://WORLD process set
no longer contains all processes in the application. Moreover, process sets containing
processes that have called MPI_Session_finalize are no longer valid, what means that
the mpi://WORLD process set can become invalid during a resource change. Since the
process sets are only used for creating communicators, this does not pose a problem for
the application, but the program has to retrieve the names of the available process sets
before every resource change in order to find the new valid process sets.
2.3.2. The libmpidynres Simulation Layer for MPI Sessions
By now, there is no implementation of MPI supporting the MPI Sessions model. A
platform for running applications in an MPI Sessions environment is provided by the
libmpidynres simulation layer [11], which emulates the behavior of an MPI Sessions
runtime environment.
For this, libmpidynres includes a component handling calls to the MPI Sessions
environment as well as a simulated resource manager, called the scheduler. These components provide all necessary functions for requesting resource changes and integrating
them in the user application using the MPI Sessions model.
The libmpidynres simulation layer itself uses a fixed number of processes that are
spawned at startup time. One of these processes is used by the scheduler, which runs in
the background and waits for resource change requests using non-blocking MPI receive
calls. The other processes are available for the user application running on a subset of
18
2.3. MPI Sessions
these processes.
The available processes can hereby be in different states, representing idling resources,
resources reserved by the application, working processes, processes whose termination
was proposed by the scheduler, and processes that have accepted the proposed termination. The processes transition between these states using calls to the mpidynres scheduler
for requesting resources to be added or removed and for accepting the resource changes
that where proposed by the scheduler in response to these requests. The functions used
for controlling resource changes are not part of the MPI standard, as they would be in
the responsibility of the resource manager used on real-world systems, and are newly
introduced by libmpidynres.
For changing the resources of an application running inside the mpidynres simulation
layer, the user can request resource changes using the MPIDYNRES_RC_get function. This
function will return the type of the resulting resource change and a process set containing
all processes affected by it. The performed resource change can not be influenced by
the user. Instead, libmpidynres implements two different scheduler handlers, one
returning resource changes that lead to a steadily increasing and decreasing number
of processes, and the second one returning random resource changes for every request.
The scheduler interface also includes a function for passing optimization hints to the
resource manager, called MPIDYNRES_add_scheduling_hints, but this function has not
yet been implemented by now.
Once the resource change has been proposed by the resource manager, it can be accepted by the application using the MPIDYNRES_RC_accept function. This function adapts
the MPI Sessions environment by creating new process sets for the resource change as
described in the previous section. It also allows the user to pass an MPI_Info object,
which is made available to all newly added processes and simplifies the synchronization
of the current application state over all processes.
Apart from this additional functionality, libmpidynres supports all functions defined
by the MPI Sessions model, especially the functions for initializing and finalizing the
MPI Sessions environment, and the ones for retrieving information about the available
process sets and creating MPI groups and communicators using this information.
These functions are only available inside the mpidynres simulation layer. Therefore,
this layer has to be set up before starting the user application. This is done by an
additional a wrapper around the user program, which initializes the MPI environment
using the world model and then starts mpidynres. When doing so, the mpidynres
environment is passed a pointer to the main function of the user application, which
is executed by the simulation layer. Inside of the user application, the MPI Sessions
environment can then be started using MPI_Session_init, as described above.
19

3. Realization with Standalone p4est
The main goal of this thesis is the extension of p4est to make it possible to use dynamic
resource management with p4est. Hereby, the main focus lies on creating a proof-ofconcept implementation which fully supports all necessary use cases and provides the
highest possible flexibility.
3.1. Emulating Dynamic Resources
This work aims to provide an example application that uses the MPI Sessions interface
for dynamic resource management. As there currently is no implementation of MPI
supporting this model, the libmpidynres simulation layer will be used later in this
thesis. However, in order to demonstrate and test the resource adaptation procedures
added to p4est, resource changes are emulated by the user program as a first approach
without using the MPI Sessions standard.
For this, the application spawns a fixed number of processes at startup time. Out
of this set, three MPI communicators are created, representing all processes in the
application, the active processes, and the idling processes. All processes are either active
or idling.
At the beginning of the simulation, a fixed number of processes is added to the
active communicator. On these processes, the grid is created, while the processes
in the idle communicator wait for the next simulation phase using an MPI barrier.
After every simulation phase, a fixed resource change is performed by removing some
processes from the idle communicator and adding them to the active communicator using
MPI_Group operations. After this, the simulation state and the grid are synchronized
to the new processes in the active communicator, and the simulation continues with
the next phase. For removing resources from the active communicator, an analogous
procedure is used. Yet, it has to be noted that the removed processes may not terminate
after the resource change, because this would terminate the application. Instead, they
have to return to the idle state.
All these actions have to be performed by the application explicitly and are part of
the main simulation loop. Hardcoding all resource changes inside the user application
makes this naive approach very inflexible, and it requires large changes to the user code.
Also, it does not provide actual dynamic resources, as the application always controls a
previously fixed number of processes which are spawned at startup time. Therefore,
this approach is not practical as a method for dynamic resource management, and will
actually perform worse than an application using static resources. Later in this thesis,
21
3. Realization with Standalone p4est
this naive approach will be substituted for libmpidynres, which provides the interface
of the MPI Sessions environment and allows to write the application in nearly the same
way it would be done in an actual dynamic environment.
3.2. Application View on Resource Change with p4est
In order to make the implementation of the resource adaptation mechanisms independent from the other parts of the application, especially the dynamic resource management approach itself, the extensions made to p4est only implement means for migrating
the grid between different MPI communicators, which have to be created beforehand
and contain the sets of processes before and after the resource change. This makes it
necessary for the application to perform two separate operations when adapting the
resources used.
First, the actual resource change has to be made by allocating new processes from the
runtime environment. This is done by the underlying resource manager and is therefore
dependent of the software stack used. Since this step does not require any action from
p4est, the described procedures for resource adaptation can be used on any system.
From the new set of processes, a new MPI communicator can be created which is
afterwards used as the main communicator for the grid. If resources should be released
during the resource change, the corresponding processes are simply not included in the
new communicator and terminated after the resource change is complete, eventually
using further calls to the runtime environment.
Second, the application data and especially the grid have to be synchronized and
expanded to the new processes and moved away from resources that should be released.
For migrating the grid, the functions introduced subsequently can be used. After all
application data has been transferred, the old MPI communicator can be destroyed and
the removed processes terminated.
Apart from making the resource change independent of the environment used, this
approach of migrating the grid between different communicators also allows to implement possible use cases other than changing the resources of the complete application.
As there are almost no limitations on what processes the communicators contain, the
grid can also be transferred between already running processes of the same application,
which can be useful for rearranging the grid to fit the physical topology of the computer.
The migration of the grid structure is implemented in three functions extending p4est,
which provide methods for adding and removing resources separately and directly
replacing the MPI communicator spanned by the grid. These functions will be discussed
in the following sections.
22
3.2. Application View on Resource Change with p4est
3.2.1. Adding Resources
The function for adding resources to the grid has the following interface:
1 p4est_t * p4est_dynres_add (p4est_t *p4est, sc_MPI_Comm new_mpicomm);
2
3 p4est_t * p4est_dynres_add_ext (p4est_t *p4est, sc_MPI_Comm new_mpicomm,
4 int is_added, int num_added,
5 void *user_pointer);
6
7 Parameters:
8 p4est [in,out] The p4est to be changed
9 new_mpicomm [in] The MPI communicator used after the resource change
10 is_added [in] Indicates whether the calling process is new
11 num_added [in] The number of processes added
12 user_pointer [in] The new value for the p4est user pointer
13
14 Returns:
15 The p4est structure after the resource change
The naming of all functions follows the same scheme. Starting with p4est_dynres
to indicate they are part of p4est and belong to the group of functions responsible
for dynamic resource management, they are postfixed with the actual operation they
perform, here adding resources to the grid. This pattern is common inside p4est and
makes the interface consistent with the rest of the library.
Also following the scheme of p4est, there are two interfaces for the same functionality.
The first one uses only the minimal arguments necessary, while the second one, postfixed
with _ext, adds more parameters in order to provide higher flexibility and, in some
cases, efficiency.
The first parameter to all functions for dynamic resource usage is the p4est object
worked on. This object is adapted in place and will contain the resulting grid on the
new resources after the call.
When resources are added to the grid, the added processes, either newly spawned,
allocated from the runtime environment, or adapted from other components of the
application, do not contain a valid grid before calling the function. In this case, the first
parameter is a pure output parameter that should be initialized to NULL. The function
will then create a new p4est object inside the passed variable and expand the grid to
span this new object.
The second parameter is the MPI communicator the grid should be expanded to. As
this function is only used for adding resources, the processes inside the new_mpicomm
must be a superset of the processes in the old communicator of the grid. They may,
however, contain the same processes, so it does not need to be a strict superset. This
is useful for just reordering the processes inside the communicator. Yet, this could be
done more efficiently by using the already existing repartitioning function of p4est
after exchanging the MPI communicator from within the user application. Therefore,
using the functions for dynamic resource management for communicators with the
same processes is supported, but discouraged.
23
3. Realization with Standalone p4est
The simple interface using only these two parameters is already very flexible, but the
extended interface adds more functionality and brings some performance improvement.
While the first version has to use MPI communication in order to infer the overall
resource change and communicate it to all processes, the extended interface introduces
additional parameters describing the resource change, namely is_added and num_added.
The first of these is a boolean flag indicating whether the calling process is being added
by the resource change. In the simple version this is determined by checking the p4est
object for NULL. Using an additional flag allows passing an existing grid structure in a
newly added process, what can be useful if this process was already part of another
grid or an earlier version of the grid before and saves some initialization effort for the
new grid. The second argument, num_added, contains the total number of processes
added during the resource change and would otherwise have to be determined by an
MPI_Allgather operation on the is_added flag or the initialization status of the p4est
structure. Therefore, passing these two parameters can save quite a large amount of
MPI communication and therefore improves the performance of this function.
The previous two arguments are introduced assuming that the user application has
some knowledge about the nature of the resource change, so the values of the parameters
are known beforehand. This is a reasonable assumption because the application has to
initiate the resource change by passing optimization hints to a runtime environment
or allocating a specific number of processes for use with p4est, what usually requires
knowledge of these parameters. In this case, it would be a waste of computing power to
calculate them again inside the resource change function. If they are unknown for any
reason, e.g. if the resource change is initiated by only some of the processes without
requiring the others to know any details about their nature, either the simple interface
can be used, or they can be set to negative values, in which case they will be ignored.
The last parameter of the extended interface is a pointer to some not further specified
user data. This is used to initialize the user data pointer associated with the p4est object.
As the grid may be newly created on some processes, the user data on new processes
will be set to NULL by the basic interface. In order to provide a possibility to set the user
pointer for all processes after a resource change, the user_pointer parameter can be
used. If no user data is needed, it can be set to NULL. An option to explicitly ignore this
value and keep the old user pointer is not necessary, as the old pointer can as easily be
passed to the resource change function again with only minimal effort.
For most cases, because of the better performance the extended interface should be
used. If the user data is not needed and the details of the resource change are unknown
to some processes, the basic interface can be used for simplicity.
24
3.2. Application View on Resource Change with p4est
3.2.2. Removing Resources
The counterparts to the adding functions are the functions for removing specific resources:
1 p4est_t * p4est_dynres_remove (p4est_t *p4est, sc_MPI_Comm new_mpicomm);
2
3 p4est_t * p4est_dynres_remove_ext (p4est_t *p4est, sc_MPI_Comm new_mpicomm,
4 int is_removed, int num_removed,
5 p4est_weight_t weight_fn);
6
7 Parameters:
8 p4est [in,out] The p4est to be changed
9 new_mpicomm [in] The MPI communicator used after the resource change
10 is_removed [in] Indicates whether the calling process will be removed
11 num_removed [in] The number of processes removed
12 weight_fn [in] The weighting function used for repartitioning the grid
13
14 Returns:
15 The p4est structure after the resource change, or NULL for removed processes
These functions can be used for moving all data to other processes and reducing the
grid to a lower number of processes.
Again, there are two interfaces providing the same functionality. The parameters
common to both functions are the same as for the other resource change functions. The
first one is the p4est object that will be modified by the resource change. It will be
adapted in place, so it will contain the resulting smaller grid after the function call, or
will be set to NULL if the calling process is to be removed.
The second parameter is the MPI communicator that will be used by p4est after the
resource change. It has to contain a subset of the processes in the original communicator
of the grid. Like for the adding function, it does not have to be a strict subset, but
may contain the same processes, possibly in a different order. Yet, using this function
for simply reordering processes is discouraged, as the repartitioning function from
p4est indirectly provides a more efficient way to accomplish this. If the calling process
should be removed during the resource change, the new_communicator should be set to
MPI_COMM_NULL to indicate that the calling process is not part of the new communicator.
Assuming the user application to have some knowledge about the nature of the
resource change, the extended interface adds three additional parameters. The first of
them, is_removed, is a boolean flag indicating whether the calling process should be
removed during the resource change. In the simple interface, this value can be easily
inferred by checking the new_mpicomm for MPI_COMM_NULL, and since there are no reasons
to pass a different communicator instead, this parameter is not useful in general. It is
mainly included in order to provide an interface following the same basic structure as
for the extended adding function. If this parameter should be ignored, a negative value
can be passed instead.
The second parameter added for the extended interface is num_removed, describing
the total number of processes that will be removed during the resource change. It can be
25
3. Realization with Standalone p4est
calculated by inspecting the size of the difference between the sets of processes in the old
and new MPI communicator, and distributing it to all processes via an MPI broadcast.
As this value is usually known to the user application, the extended interface provides
this parameter as a way of passing this value directly in order to avoid recomputation
and thus save some communication and improve the performance. If it is unknown to
the user, it can be set to a negative value in order to be ignored as well.
The last parameter in the extended interface is a weighting function assigning a weight
to every cell of the grid. This is useful as the removal of processes requires cells to be
moved away from some processes and distributed over the others, what corresponds to
repartitioning the grid. In order to avoid having to repartition the grid again after the
resource change because a weighted partitioning as described in Section 2.1.2 should be
used, the extended interface allows to pass the same weight function that is used for the
partitioning function. Currently, weighted partitioning is not yet supported, and the last
parameter will be ignored by the resource change function.
If the information about the resource change is unknown to the user application, and
no weighted partitioning should be used, the basic interface can be used for simplicity.
3.2.3. Replacing the MPI Communicator
Although the functions for adding and removing processes already provide all required
functionality, resource changes in which processes are added and removed simultaneously are very common. Especially when it comes to redistributing the application
over the nodes of the computer in order to improve the locality of adjacent grid cells,
or requesting resources close to the nodes containing one location on the grid and
releasing nodes at other places in order to account for a workload peak propagating
through the grid, this can be very useful in many situations. While the same effect
could be accomplished by first adding the new resources and then removing other ones
afterwards, this would require calling two functions for performing one action.
Even if it is known that the application will always either allocate or release resources,
but not do both at the same time, using separate functions for both operations requires
the user application to check the kind of the resource change and then distinguish
between both cases, while a unified function could be used in either case.
Yet, the separate interfaces are kept, because the combined function for replacing the
MPI communicator uses them internally, and they are exposed to the user in order to
provide low-level access to the basic functionality without the additional overhead of a
combined function if the user only requires one operation.
1 p4est_t * p4est_dynres_replace (p4est_t *p4est, sc_MPI_Comm new_mpicomm);
2
3 p4est_t * p4est_dynres_replace_ext (p4est_t *p4est, sc_MPI_Comm new_mpicomm,
4 int is_added, int num_added,
5 int is_removed, int num_removed,
6 void *user_pointer, p4est_weight_t weight_fn);
7
8
26
3.3. Changes to p4est
9 Parameters:
10 p4est [in,out] The p4est to be changed
11 new_mpicomm [in] The MPI communicator used after the resource change
12 is_added [in] Indicates whether the calling process is new
13 num_added [in] The number of processes added
14 is_removed [in] Indicates whether the calling process will be removed
15 num_removed [in] The number of processes removed
16 user_pointer [in] The new value for the p4est user pointer
17 weight_fn [in] The weighting function used for repartitioning the grid
18
19 Returns:
20 The p4est structure after the resource change, or NULL for removed processes
The interface of the function for replacing the MPI communicator is the combination
of the previous ones.
While the basic interface only accepts the necessary parameters, namely the p4est
object and the new MPI communicator, the extended function uses all parameters from
the extended interfaces of the elementary resource change functions.
Again, the grid will be modified in place. For newly added processes, it should be
set to NULL when using the simple interface. After the function call, it will contain the
adapted grid structure, or NULL for processes that will be removed.
For the new MPI communicator passed in new_mpicomm there is only one constraint:
The new communicator must contain at least one process that was already part of the
old communicator, that is, the intersection between the sets of processes in the old and
new MPI communicators may not be empty. Apart from this, the options for the new
communicator are not limited, allowing this function even to replace all processes but
one for others, keeping the same processes, or remove all but one processes. Also, the
order of the processes inside the new communicator can be chosen arbitrarily, especially
the ranks of the processes kept over this operation are not fixed.
The additional parameters in the extended interface correspond to the ones from the
elementary resource change functions, allowing the user to pass all required information
about the resource change in order to avoid recomputing known values, and setting the
new user data of the grid structure after the resource change. If any of these values are
unknown or not needed, any of them can be set to negative values or to NULL for the
user pointer and weighting function, in which case they will be ignored.
3.3. Changes to p4est
The functions described in the previous section are implemented as a part of p4est.
Hereby, the simple interfaces are used as wrappers calling the extended functions with
negative or NULL values for the unknown parameters. The computation of the missing
values is done by the extended functions, as they can be used without specifying all
parameters as well, in case the user only needs some of the additional values.
Almost all changes are made inside the p4est.c file and the corresponding header
27
3. Realization with Standalone p4est
files for two- and three-dimensional grids, and use the existing functions of the library
for both functionality and error handling that were described in Section 2.1.2.
3.3.1. Adding Resources
Listing 3.1: Function for adding resources to p4est
1 p4est_t *p4est_dynres_add_ext (p4est_t * p4est, sc_MPI_Comm new_mpicomm,
2 int is_added, int num_added,
3 void *user_pointer) {
4
5 // compute unknown input values
6 if(is_added < 0)
7 is_added = (p4est == NULL);
8 if(num_added < 0)
9 sc_MPI_Allreduce(&is_added, &num_added, 1, MPI_INT, MPI_SUM, new_mpicomm);
10 if(num_added < 1)
11 return p4est;
12
13 // save the old MPI environment and assign the new one
14 sc_MPI_Comm oldcomm = MPI_COMM_NULL;
15 int old_rank = -1;
16 int old_num_procs = -1;
17
18 if(p4est == NULL) {
19 // ... allocate the p4est structure ...
20 p4est_comm_parallel_env_assign (p4est, new_mpicomm);
21 } else {
22 oldcomm = p4est->mpicomm;
23 old_rank = p4est->mpirank;
24 old_num_procs = p4est->mpisize;
25 p4est_comm_parallel_env_replace(p4est, new_mpicomm);
26 }
27
28 // find the rank of an old process to be used as root for the following communication
29 // ... allocate global information array ...
30 MPI_Allgather (&is_added, 1, MPI_INT, global_added, 1, MPI_INT, new_mpicomm);
31 int root = -1;
32 for(int i = 0; i < p4est->mpisize; i++) {
33 if(!global_added[i]) {
34 root = i;
35 break;
36 }
37 }
38 if(root < 0)
39 P4EST_GLOBAL_LERROR ("p4est_process_add called with only new processes\n");
40
41 // ... create a communicator containing all new processes and the root process ...
42 //... broadcast connectivity and quadrant data size ...
43 // ... allocate p4est->global_first_quadrant ...
44 // init some member variables
28
3.3. Changes to p4est
45 p4est->user_pointer = user_pointer;
46 p4est_comm_count_quadrants(p4est);
47
48 //these variables are already correct on the parent processes
49 if(is_added) {
50 // set tree indices and quadrant number to show that this process is empty
51 p4est->first_local_tree = -1;
52 p4est->last_local_tree = -2;
53 p4est->local_num_quadrants = 0;
54
55 // ... allocate trees array ...
56 for(int i = 0; i < p4est->connectivity->num_trees; i++){
57 p4est_tree_t *tree = p4est_tree_array_index (p4est->trees, i);
58
59 // ... allocate quadrant arrays and first and last quadrants ...
60 tree->quadrants_offset = 0;
61 for(int j = 0; j <= P4EST_QMAXLEVEL; j++)
62 tree->quadrants_per_level[j] = 0;
63 for(int j = P4EST_MAXLEVEL; j <= P4EST_MAXLEVEL; j++)
64 tree->quadrants_per_level[j] = -1;
65 tree->maxlevel = 0;
66 }
67 // ... allocate memory pools ...
68 }
69
70 // ... allocate structure for the first quadrant on the process ...
71 //fill global partition information
72 p4est_comm_global_partition (p4est, NULL);
73
74 // ... free temporary data structures, release old_mpicomm ...
75 P4EST_ASSERT(p4est_is_valid(p4est));
76 return p4est;
77 }
When adding resources to a grid, the p4est object on newly added processes may not
yet exist. Therefore, before starting to adapt the grid structure it has to be created on
the processes where it was set to NULL. This is done using the P4EST_ALLOC_ZERO macro
provided by p4est. Next, the parallel environment of the grid, consisting of the MPI communicator and some data related to it, is updated using p4est_parallel_env_assign
for newly allocated grids and p4est_parallel_env_replace otherwise.
The first step to be done for adding resources to the grid is to collect data about the
resource change itself. The required values are especially whether the calling process
was newly added, the total number of added processes, and the new rank of one process
that already was in the old communicator. The first two of these do not have to be
computed if they are specified using the extended interface.
If the flag indicating whether the calling process has been added by the current
resource change is not specified explicitly, it is obtained by comparing the passed
p4est object to NULL. The other values can be computed once every process has global
knowledge about these flags on the other processes. For this, they are collected using an
29
3. Realization with Standalone p4est
MPI_Allgather operation. Afterwards, every process can sum up the received values
locally in order to compute the number of added processes, and find the rank of the
first process for which the flag is set to false.
Once all necessary information is known, the first thing to be sent to the new processes
is the connectivity structure defining the topology of the different trees. For this, a
new temporary MPI communicator is created, containing all new processes and the old
process identified previously. This communicator is used as the root for distributing
the connectivity structure to the new processes using the p4est_connectivity_bcast
function from p4est. The same communicator is used to broadcast the size of the user
data stored in every cell to the new processes.
Next, the tree structures and administrative information about the local cells are
initialized on the new processes. For this, the data from the connectivity structure is
used to create the correct number of trees. Also, some memory pools that will be used
for storing cell data, user data, and temporary values are allocated, if they had not
already existed previously.
The final step is to set up information about the global partitioning of the grid. This
part again involves all processes of the grid, not just the newly added ones. After
allocating the necessary data structures, the partitioning information is communicated
using the function p4est_comm_global_partition, which is part of p4est.
The function is concluded by freeing temporary data and the old MPI communicator
and assuring that the resulting grid is valid.
3.3.2. Removing Resources
Listing 3.2: Function for removing resources from p4est
1 p4est_t *p4est_dynres_remove_ext (p4est_t * p4est, sc_MPI_Comm new_mpicomm,
2 int is_removed, int num_removed,
3 p4est_weight_t weight_fn) {
4
5 // compute unknown input values
6 if(is_removed < 0)
7 is_removed = (new_mpicomm == MPI_COMM_NULL);
8 if(num_removed < 0)
9 sc_MPI_Allreduce(&is_removed, &num_removed, 1, MPI_INT, MPI_SUM, p4est->mpicomm);
10 if(weight_fn != NULL)
11 // ... warn about not implemented weighted partitioning ...
12 if(num_removed < 1)
13 return p4est;
14
15 // save old MPI environment
16 sc_MPI_Comm oldcomm = p4est->mpicomm;
17 int oldsize = p4est->mpisize;
18
19 // collect information about the removed processes
20 // ... allocate global information array ...
30
3.3. Changes to p4est
21 int new_num_procs;
22 MPI_Allgather (&is_removed, 1, MPI_INT, global_removed, 1, MPI_INT, oldcomm);
23 int quadrants_moved = 0;
24 for(int i = 0; i < oldsize; i++) {
25 if(global_removed[i])
26 quadrants_moved += p4est->global_first_quadrant[i+1]-p4est->
global_first_quadrant[i];
27 }
28
29 // calculate local target quadrant count
30 p4est_locidx_t local_target;
31 if(is_removed) {
32 local_target = 0;
33 } else {
34 // distribute the affected quadrants equally between all processes
35 int new_num_procs;
36 MPI_Comm_size(new_mpicomm, &new_num_procs);
37 local_target = p4est->local_num_quadrants + (quadrants_moved / new_num_procs);
38 int new_rank;
39 MPI_Comm_rank(new_mpicomm, &new_rank);
40 if(new_rank < quadrants_moved % new_num_procs)
41 local_target++;
42 }
43
44 // communicate distribution array
45 // ... allocate target distribution array ...
46 int num_procs = p4est->mpisize;
47 MPI_Allgather (&local_target, 1, P4EST_MPI_LOCIDX,
48 target_distribution, 1, P4EST_MPI_LOCIDX, p4est->mpicomm);
49
50 // repartition according to the target quadrant counts
51 int global_shipped = p4est_partition_given (p4est, target_distribution);
52 if (global_shipped)
53 p4est->revision++;
54 // remove all empty processes
55 int p4est_exists = p4est_comm_parallel_env_reduce(&p4est);
56
57 // ... free temporary data structures, release old mpicomm ...
58 if(p4est_exists)
59 P4EST_ASSERT(p4est_is_valid(p4est));
60 return p4est;
61 else
62 return NULL;
63 }
Like the adding functions, the functions for removing processes start by collecting
information about the resource change. This information consists of which processes
should be removed, how many processes will be removed, and how many quadrants are
on these processes. The first two values can be passed to the function using the extended
interface, in which case they do not have to be computed. If they are not known, the first
step is to check whether the new MPI communicator is MPI_COMM_NULL, in which case
31
3. Realization with Standalone p4est
the process will be removed. This data for every single process is then distributed to the
others using an MPI_Allgather operation. The received data can be used to compute
the number of removed processes and, by looking at the indices of the received data
array where the flag is set to true, already contains information about which processes
will be affected. This information can finally be combined with the global partitioning
information stored in the p4est main structure to calculate the number of cells on the
processes that will be removed.
These cells then have to be moved to the other processes. The simplest approach
would be to equally distribute all cells over the rest of the application. This would make
it unnecessary to compute the number of cells on the removed processes, but forces a
uniform partitioning. The p4est library on the other hand allows using a weighting
function to assign a weight to every cell and partition the grid according to these
weights. This partitioning would be lost after every resource change when using this
simpler approach. Later, this should be avoided by using an optional weight function
for redistributing the cells from removed processes. The corresponding parameter is
already present in the extended interface, but currently ignored. As a compromise until
weighted partitioning will be supported, only a certain amount of cells corresponding
to the number of cells that have to be moved are distributed equally over the processes,
while the other ones are not moved. While this approach does not provide fully weighted
partitioning, it does form an improvement compared to the naive approach of purely
uniform partitioning. If no weighted partitioning is used, the resulting distribution will
stay uniform, and only little additional computation is required.
Once the local quadrant count after the resource change has been determined that
way, it is exchanged using an MPI_Allgather operation to obtain the global distribution
of cells over the processes. This can be used to communicate the cell data and make
the corresponding changes to the administrative information of the grid and the tree
structures using the p4est_partition_given function, which is defined by p4est and
internally used by the repartitioning function.
Finally, the processes containing no cells are removed from the grid using the function
p4est_comm_parallel_env_reduce, which is part of p4est as well and removes all empty
processes. This is equal to removing the processes affected by the resource change, as
these have previously been emptied and all other processes that might have been empty
before the resource change have been filled with quadrants from the removed processes.
In the end, the temporary data structures for the cell distribution and the ranks of the
removed processes are freed, and the validity of the resulting grid is checked.
3.3.3. Replacing the MPI Communicator
The replacement function combining both adding and removing of processes only does
some computations in order to obtain necessary information about the resource change,
then it delegates the actual work to the elementary functions for adding and removing
processes.
32
3.3. Changes to p4est
Listing 3.3: Function for replacing processes of p4est
1 p4est_t *p4est_dynres_replace_ext (p4est_t *p4est, sc_MPI_Comm new_mpicomm,
2 int is_added, int num_added,
3 int is_removed, int num_removed,
4 void *user_pointer, p4est_weight_t weight_fn) {
5
6 //compute unknown input values
7 if(is_removed < 0)
8 is_removed = (new_mpicomm == MPI_COMM_NULL);
9 if(is_added < 0)
10 is_added = (p4est == NULL);
11
12 sc_MPI_Comm new_group;
13 // ... create MPI group with all processes from new communicator ...
14 sc_MPI_Comm old_group;
15 // ... create MPI group with all processes from old communicator ...
16 sc_MPI_Comm kept_group;
17 // ... create the intersection of these two groups ...
18
19 int is_kept = kept_group != MPI_GROUP_EMPTY;
20
21 // remove processes
22 MPI_Comm kept_comm;
23 if(num_removed != 0 && !is_added) {
24 // ... create communicator from kept_group ...
25 if(num_removed > 0)
26 p4est_dynres_remove_ext(p4est, kept_comm, is_removed, num_removed, weight_fn);
27 else
28 p4est_dynres_remove_ext(p4est, kept_comm, is_removed, -1, weight_fn);
29 }
30
31 // add processes
32 if(num_added != 0 && !is_removed) {
33 if(num_added > 0)
34 p4est = p4est_dynres_add_ext(p4est, new_mpicomm, is_added, num_added,
35 user_pointer);
36 else
37 p4est = p4est_dynres_add_ext(p4est, new_mpicomm, is_added, -1, user_pointer);
38 }
39
40 // ... free temporary groups and communicators ...
41 if(p4est != NULL)
42 P4EST_ASSERT(p4est_is_valid(p4est));
43 return p4est;
44 }
Using the elementary functions requires creating a temporary MPI communicator
containing the resources used between adding and removing processes. As the old
communicator is not known to all added processes, the union of the old and new
communicators can not be created. For this reason, the removing operation will be
33
3. Realization with Standalone p4est
performed before adding new processes. When replacing many resources, this can lead
to lower performance, because for some time the grid is running only on the possibly
very low number of processes that are kept over the replacement operation. Also, this
order of the removing and adding functions is the reason why at least one process has
to be retained over this operation.
When calling the function for replacing the MPI communicator, first a new communicator representing the intersection of the sets of processes in the old and new
communicators is created. This one is then used to remove all processes from the grid
which are not inside the new communicator. Afterwards, the new processes can be
added in order to obtain a grid running on the desired processes. For adding and
removing processes, the extended interfaces are used, passing on the given additional
arguments and setting negative or NULL values where no input values are available.
Like the other functions, this function concludes by releasing temporary data structures, in this case the temporary MPI groups and communicator, and checking the
validity of the resulting grid.
34
4. Realization with libmpidynres and p4est
The functionality added to p4est is designed to be independent of the mechanisms
used for dynamic resource management, but the intended use case is to combine the
functionality of the extended p4est library with the MPI Sessions model in order to
obtain a dynamic or static grid running on dynamically adapting resources. For this,
the libmpidynres simulation layer is used.
In contrast to the naive approach of running the application on different subsets of a
fixed set of processes which are all managed by the user, as described in the previous
chapter, libmpidynres simulates an MPI Sessions environment inside a separate process,
and allows the user application to communicate with it via library calls using an
extended version of the interface specified in the MPI 4.0 standard. Therefore, the
user application does not have to offer the resource change mechanisms itself, but can
retrieve resource changes from the library. This reduces the necessary changes to the
user code to a wrapper function starting and initializing the simulated MPI Sessions
environment, which in turn then starts the actual application. Inside this application, no
further changes are needed, and it would be able to run directly on a system providing
an MPI Sessions environment if such a system already existed.
The adapted application using libmpidynres works as follows:
First, the MPI environment is initialized using the normal MPI_Init function from the
MPI standard. After setting up some data structures containing information about the
initial configuration of libmpidynres, this environment is used to start the mpidynres
simulation environment providing the MPI Sessions API. The simulation layer is passed
a function containing the original main function of the user application.
The user application now has access to the MPI Sessions interface through the
libmpidynres simulation layer. Therefore, it can request resource changes from the
runtime environment and create new process sets according to the result returned by
libmpidynres as described in Section 2.3.2. The process sets are then communicated to
all processes, and after accepting the resource change from the runtime environment,
they can be used to create the new MPI communicators incorporating the resource
changes.
Once the new communicator is created, the application data can be synchronized to
the new processes, and the grid can be migrated to the new communicator using the
functions explained above.
The previous procedure is, with a few exceptions on specific function signatures
and the resource change requests, not aware of the libmpidynres simulation layer and
can be ported to a native MPI Sessions environment with only minimal effort. Thus,
this approach provides a practically highly relevant method of managing dynamic
35
4. Realization with libmpidynres and p4est
resources and demonstrates the usage of the extended functionality of p4est in a close
to real-world environment.
Previously, the resource changes retrieved from the mpidynres library could not be
manipulated by the user. The only resource change request functionality implemented
just provided access to two different resource management handlers, returning either a
fixed or a random resource change at every call. This is useful for testing the functionality
of an application using dynamic resources, but the user application has no possibility
to react to changing workload by requesting specific resource changes. Therefore, the
libmpidynres library was extended by another resource management handler providing
a modified interface for requesting user defined resource changes. This interface is
not part of the MPI Sessions standard and only used for testing with resource changes
specified by the user:
1 int DEBUG_MPIDYNRES_RC_user_request(MPI_Session session,
2 int delta, char pset[], MPIDYNRES_RC_type *rc_type,
3 MPIDYNRES_RC_tag *tag, MPI_Info *info);
4
5 Parameters:
6 session [in,out] The MPI Session to be changed
7 delta [in] The number of processes to be added or removed
8 pset [out] The new process set after the resource change
9 rc_type [out] The type of the resource change performed
10 tag [out] Unique tag identifying this resource change
11 info [out] MPI info object describing the resource change,
12 currently unused
13
14 Returns:
15 Non-zero if an error occurred
This function is exposed to the user as part of the mpidynres resource change request
interface. The input parameters are the MPI Session to which the resource change
belongs, and an integer number specifying the requested resource change. This delta
value describes the number of processes that should be added or removed. When
removing processes, delta should be less than zero. As this function is only used for
testing purposes, the user has no influence on which processes are added or removed,
and libmpidynres will choose the affected processes automatically. Also, this function
does not support adding and removing processes at the same time, because for once,
the exact processes that will be removed and added can not be specified anyway, and
second, the original libmpidynres does not yet support replacing processes directly itself.
These two drawbacks are the reason why this function should only be used for testing
a simulation on a varying number of processes, and is no appropriate replacement
for the not yet implemented resource change management functionality via sending
optimization hints to the scheduler or resource manager.
The last four parameters are output parameters that will contain information about
the resource change performed in response to the user request. The pset parameter
will be set to the process set containing all active processes after the resource change,
36
and can be used by the application to create the new MPI communicator. The rc_type
specifies the type of the resource change, that is, whether processes have been added,
removed, or there were no changes. These two parameters can differ from the originally
requested change, because the mpidynres environment can only perform changes on a
limited number of processes spawned during startup time. If this number would be
exceeded by the request, the function returns the maximum possible resource change.
Similarly, the application is not able to release more processes than are currently active.
Finally, the resource change tag uniquely identifies the resource change and allows
the user to request new resource changes while older ones are not yet completed in
some cases, and the MPI_Info object is currently not used and only included in order to
provide an interface which is consistent with the other resource change functions.
Internally, this request is handled by sending an MPI message containing all important
information to the mpidynres scheduler, which then calls the corresponding handling
function in the mpidynres scheduler handler:
1 void DEBUG_MPIDYNRES_scheduler_handle_user_rc
2 (MPIDYNRES_scheduler *scheduler,
3 MPI_Status *status, int session_id,
4 int delta);
5
6 Parameters:
7 scheduler [in] The scheduler object managing the available resources
8 status [out] Status returned by this function
9 session_id [in] Identifies the MPI Session that should be changed
10 delta [in] The number of processes to be added or removed
This function is not visible to the user and only called by the libmpidynres scheduler.
As arguments it is passed the structure associated with the calling scheduler, which
among others contains information about the running and idling processes, the mpidynres
manager used, a flag indicating the status of pending resource shutdowns, and the next
values for process set IDs and resource change tags. The MPI_Status object is used to
extract information about the return state of the resource change after the function call,
and is also provided and evaluated by the libmpidynres scheduler. The session_id
internally identifies the MPI Session used for this resource change, and the delta value
contains the resource change request passed by the user. This delta value is the only
difference of this function to the handler for other resource change requests.
The implementation of this function is largely equivalent to the one of the one responsible for handling the common, not user defined resource changes. After retrieving some
information from the scheduler structure and creating the request to the resource manager, the request is passed to the user_rc_manager added in this thesis and described
later. This call to the manager returns a new process set describing the desired changes
as well as the type of the resource change. This information is used to create the final
process set after applying the retrieved changes and update the internal process set map
and the membership of processes to the process sets. Finally, the states of the affected
processes are changed according to the resource change, the return message is created
37
4. Realization with libmpidynres and p4est
and sent to the caller over the MPI.
The user request manager which is responsible for the main functionality of creating
the process set representing the resource change contains all functions required to
implement the scheduler_mgmt interface. Especially, it defines functions for initializing
and freeing the manager and retrieving the initial process set according to the mpidynres
manager configuration. The function for registering scheduling hints to the mpidynres
runtime is not implemented, as it is not implemented in the other managers either, nor
is the main function for handling resource changes other than the new user defined
requests, as this function is not meant to be used with this manager. The previous
functions are implemented roughly the same as in the other managers, with only minor
changes accounting for the different manager structure used, and therefore will not be
described here.
The most important function is the one responsible for handling requests for resource
changes specified by the user:
1 int DEBUG_MPIDYNRES_manager_handle_user_rc_msg
2 (MPIDYNRES_manager manager, int src_process_id,
3 int delta,
4 MPI_Info *rc_info, set_int *new_pset);
5
6 Parameters:
7 manager [in] The resource manager used
8 src_process_id [in] Identifies the process that issued the
9 request
10 delta [in] The number of processes to be added or
11 removed
12 rc_info [out] MPI info object describing the resource
13 change, currently unused
14 new_pset [out] The new process set after the resource
15 change
The parameters for this function are the same as for the common resource change
manager function, apart from the added delta parameter.
The libmpidynres manager contains information about the current configuration of
the application, like the number of running and idling processes. The source process ID
identifies the calling process, and is required for returning the resulting resource change,
which is specified by the delta value passed on from the original user request.
The last two parameters are output parameters that will be set to a currently unused
MPI info object and the process set describing the resource change in its internal
representation as an ordered set of integers.
The output process set is created using a helper function for generating process sets
with a specific number of processes, which is called by the manager function after
extracting the resource change type and size from the delta parameter.
1 static void gen_set (MPIDYNRES_scheduler *scheduler, set_int *set,
2 size_t delta, MPIDYNRES_RC_type type);
3
4
38
5 Parameters:
6 scheduler [in] The scheduler managing the available processes
7 set [in,out] The new process set
8 delta [in] The number of processes that should be added or removed
9 type [in] The type of the resource change
This function creates the delta process set, given information about the current
configuration and the resource change.
The scheduler object contains information about the currently active and idling
processes, as described above, while the delta value specifies the number of processes
to be added or removed and the last parameter specifies the resource change type. The
second parameter will be filled with the ranks of the processes that will be changed, and
forms the output of the function.
The processes inside the difference set are chosen in a way such that processes are
appended and removed at the end of the original set, so the resource change request
will always add or remove the processes with the highest ranks in order to form a new
process set containing the desired number of resources starting at rank zero followed by
the required number of processes with subsequent ranks.
This resource change is passed upwards through the call tree, until the result from the
resource change is returned to the user. The complete call tree is shown in Figure 4.1.
This added functionality allows the user to request resource changes of specific size,
and thus to control the number of active processes, which is necessary for reacting to
changing workload by adapting the resources accordingly.
39
4. Realization with libmpidynres and p4est
User Application MPIDYNRES MPIDYNRES handler MPIDYNRES manager
Function Call
MPI Send
Return
MPI Send
Return
handle_user_rc_msg
gen_set Function Call
handle_user_rc
user_request
MPIDYNRES scheduler
Return
Function Call
schedule
Figure 4.1.: Call structure for requesting resource changes from the mpidynres scheduler. On the left, the user application is shown in blue. It calls the user
request function of libmpidynres, shown in green, which passes it on to the
scheduler using an MPI call. The scheduler, shown in orange, passes the
request on to the request handler, which in turn uses the scheduler manager
to generate the process set. The result is then passed back up the call tree.
Dotted lines indicate that the corresponding function is currently idling,
activity is indicated by solid lines.
40
5. Evaluation
During this thesis, the necessary functionality is added to the p4est library for parallel
adaptive mesh refinement and the libmpidynres simulation layer for the MPI Sessions
environment to make it possible to create simulations on static or dynamically adaptive
grids using dynamic resource management with the MPI Sessions standard to adjust
the used resources to the current workload. In the following, the results from these
extensions are evaluated for correctness, usability and performance.
5.1. Test Suite
The correctness of the changes to p4est is assured by a complete test suite covering all
major use cases of the resource adaptation mechanisms.
For resource management, the naive approach described in Section 3.1 is used, running
the grid on different subsets of a fixed number of processes that are managed by the
user application itself. As a control application for imitating a simulation working on
the grid, simple integer calculations are used.
For this, every cell contains two numbers, called n and dn and representing the current
state and the update for the next step. The grid is initialized with integer numbers,
where the value n in each quadrant is set equal to the sum of its coordinates in x and
y direction and dn is set to zero. This leads to numbers increasing by one in x and y
direction and equal values on the diagonals, as shown for a 4 × 4 grid on the left side of
Figure 5.1.
There are two functions modifying these values to mimic a simulation on the grid.
The first one is the actual worker function, which sets the update of every cell to the
value of the cell to the left. The second function applies the thus calculated updates by
adding them to the data values. Afterwards, it resets the updates to zero. This leads to
the computation shown in Figure 5.1.
At the borders of the grid, periodic boundary conditions are used. All test cases except
the last one work on a single tree for simplicity, the behavior on more complex connectivity structures is shown by the last test case. The resulting connectivity structures are
shown in Figure 5.2.
For checking the correctness of the resulting grid from every test case, another function
is used to extract the cell data from the grid and write it to an array in z-order. Hereby,
every process writes a fixed number of cells, leading to a specific offset for the first
cell on every process. If there are less cells on a process, negative values are written
instead. This allows checking the distribution of the cells over all processes. Additionally,
41
5. Evaluation
0
1
2
3
0
1
2
3
1
2
3
4
2
3
4
5
3
0 1 2 3
4
5
6
0
1
2
3
0 1 2 3
3
5
7
9
1
3
5
7
3
5
7
9
5
7
9
11
Figure 5.1.: Example calculation on the reference grid, as performed by the test suite.
The numbers inside the cells represent the corresponding values of n.
0
1
2
3
0 1 2 3
(a) Simple connectivity structure
0 1 2 3
0
1
2
3
0 1 2 3
(b) Connectivity structure with two trees
Figure 5.2.: Connectivity structures used for the test suite. The neighborhood relations
are shown in blue, every black grid represents a tree.
42
5.1. Test Suite
the final state of the grid can be written in VTK-format using the p4est_vtk functions
defined by p4est. These output files can be used for manually checking the correctness
of the grid.
For the following scenarios, test cases are implemented:
• For adding processes:
– A standard use case, using 16 cells and going from 2 to 5 processes
– A smaller scenario, using only 4 cells and going from 2 to 5 processes, covering
the special cases of processes containing a single cell and processes becoming
empty after adding resources
• For removing resources:
– A standard use case, using 16 cells and going from 5 to 2 processes
– A smaller scenario, using only 4 cells and going from 5 to 2 processes,
covering the edge cases of processes containing a single cell and removing
empty processes
• For replacing resources:
– A standard use case, using 16 cells and going from 3 to 4 processes, with
2 processes being kept over the operation (i.e, removing one process and
adding two others)
– A scenario using 16 cells and going from 3 to 3 processes, with one process
being kept over the operation, covering the edge case of only a single process
being left unchanged
– A simpler case using 16 cells and staying at the same 5 processes, only
reordering them
– A standard use case with a different connectivity structure, using 32 processes
on two trees and going from 3 to 4 processes, keeping two processes from the
first communicator
For every test case, at first the start and goal communicators between which the grid
should be migrated are created from subsets of all processes in the world communicator.
On the first of them a new grid is created with the correct number of cells. On the
resulting grid, one iteration of the dummy computations explained above is executed.
After this, the grid is migrated to the second MPI communicator using the basic functions
for dynamic resource management of p4est. The basic functions are used because the
extended versions only leave out some computations, but do not add more code that
would need to be tested here. Finally, another iteration of dummy computations is
performed, the result of which can then be extracted from the grid and compared to the
expected solution.
These test cases cover all common use cases of resource adaption on p4est, and assure
the correctness of the implementation for all possible edge cases.
43
5. Evaluation
5.2. Example Application: SWE on p4est
For demonstrating the usage of the functionality added to p4est and libmpidynres, an
example simulation computing the shallow-water equations (SWE) on an adaptive grid
using dynamic resources was created. It is based on the SWE Teaching Code [28] and
the SWE solvers [30] from the Chair of Scientific Computing at the Technical University
of Munich.
There are two versions of the example application, one using the naive approach
for emulating dynamic resources by using different subsets from a fixed number of
processes, and the other one using libmpidynres for resource management. The basic
structure of both versions is equivalent, and they both implement the same functionality.
5.2.1. Structure and Functionality
The simulation consists of four parts: The scenario describing the initial state of the
simulation, a writer module incorporating functions for writing the current simulation
state to files in VTK-format, the main simulation code and a collection of auxiliary
functions, e.g. for parsing command line arguments. The example applications are
written in C++.
The scenario class contains four functions for returning bathymetry, water height,
and momentum in x- and y-direction for specific coordinates of the domain. For three
dimensional scenarios, an additional function for the momentum in z-direction is used.
Additionally, the scenario stores information about the size of the domain and the time
to be simulated, the latter of which can be changed by the main simulation program. The
data stored inside the scenario is used to initialize the grid when starting the simulation.
At the moment, four scenarios are implemented. In two-dimensional space, there are a
standard radial dam break scenario, a scenario containing an artificial, smooth wave, and
a scenario reading input data from netCDF files [33] containing bathymetry data and
the displacement caused to the bathymetry e.g. by an earthquake. Additionally, there
is a three-dimensional scenario forming a spherical dam break scenario, extending the
two-dimensional dam break scenario to three dimensions in order to achieve a higher
workload.
The VTK writer uses the functionality from p4est to write the current simulation state
to a series of VTK files [25]. The values which are written for every cell are the MPI
rank, the refinement level, and the simulation data, namely bathymetry, water height,
and momentum in all directions. For this, the writer is passed the p4est main object
and extracts all relevant data from the grid before writing it to the output file. Hereby,
every process writes one file, which are connected by a PVTU group file. The writer has
to be initialized with the current simulation phase and increments this value after every
file written. The number of the phase is used for naming the output files.
The main simulation code contains all other functionality, ranging from reading
command line parameters and creating the scenario and the grid to performing the
simulation, adapting the grid and managing dynamic resources.
44
5.2. Example Application: SWE on p4est
For this, the simulation manages a structure containing the current simulation state,
which consists of the current and final simulation time, the number of the phases and
their distribution over the simulation time as well as the current phase number, input
and output file names, the relevant MPI communicators or the MPI Session management
objects, and a flag indicating whether the current process has been newly spawned.
The simulation state also contains the p4est main structure. The single cells of the grid
in turn contain the simulation data organized in another structure consisting of the
bathymetry, water height and momentum in the corresponding location of the domain,
as well as fields for the updates of these variables in every iteration.
During startup time, the simulation state is initialized with respect to command line
parameters for the used scenario, the number of phases, the simulation end time, and the
base name of the output files. This includes creating an instance of the used scenario and
creating and initializing the grid structure. In the application using the naive approach
for dynamic resource management, this initialization procedure is used for all processes
including the ones activated later during runtime, as all of them have been started with
the same parameters. Only the state variables that change over time, like the current
simulation time and the current phase, are synchronized using MPI messages and the
grid is migrated using the functionality added in this thesis.
When using libmpidynres on the other hand, the original command line arguments
are not directly available to newly allocated processes, as these would be spawned
by the resource manager during runtime in a real-world environment. Instead, an
MPI_Info object is created by the already running processes, which contains all necessary
information about the current simulation state and is passed to the new processes while
allocating them over the MPI Sessions interface. The new processes can then read this
information and initialize their own state accordingly. This method is preferred over
sending the state explicitly via MPI, as the MPI Info object is communicated in either
case and thus this approach saves some communication, apart from providing a cleaner
code structure.
After the initialization is completed, the application enters the main simulation loop.
This loop iterates over all simulation phases, where every phase consists of simulating a
specific time interval, refining and coarsening the grid, and adapting the resources used.
The simulation of a specific time interval is delegated to its own function. This
function computes as many iterations of the simulation as required. In every iteration,
the application creates and exchanges the ghost layers of the grid, and then iterates
over the grid three times for resetting the updates for all values to zero, computing the
new updates on every cell using the augmented Riemann solver [14], and applying the
updates. All of these actions require callback functions for performing the described
actions on every quadrant or edge, and use the p4est iterating functions. After every simulation interval, the grid is adapted by calling the refinement and coarsening
functions from p4est. For deciding on the appropriate action for every cell, custom
coarsening and refinement decision functions are used, which flag the cells according to
the updates for the water height in the previous iteration. Both the refinement and the
45
5. Evaluation
Figure 5.3.: Simulation of a spherical dam break scenario with the example application at
t = 2s. The color indicates the pressure, the adaptive grid and its distribution
over all processes are not shown here.
coarsening function are called multiple times in order to allow changing the refinement
by multiple levels after every phase. Finally, the grid is rebalanced in order to reinstate
the invariants on adjacent grid cells described in Section 2.1.2. Repartitioning the grid
is delayed until the resources have been adjusted to the current workload, in order to
avoid repartitioning the grid twice in a row.
For dynamic resource management, two variants of the application are implemented,
using either the naive approach of switching between different subsets of a static
number of processes and the practically relevant implementation using the MPI Sessions
environment provided by the extended libmpidynres simulation layer. Both methods
are used as described in the previous section. While allocating and releasing resources,
the resource change is performed in a way that the distribution of the cells comes as
close as possible to an ideal number of cells on every process.
The result of the resource change operation is a new MPI communicator that should be
used for the next phase. Newly added processes are initialized as previously described,
using either the command line parameters and explicit MPI communication or an MPI
Info object passed over the MPI Sessions runtime environment. For synchronizing the
grid, the basic interface of the function for replacing the MPI communicator of the grid
is used. The reason for this is that the type of the resource change is not the same for
every request, and the application is meant to demonstrate the complete functionality of
the extensions made to p4est, including the ability to infer the details about the resource
46
5.2. Example Application: SWE on p4est
change from the new MPI communicator.
The scenario is stored as a static variable in order to make it accessible from within
the p4est callback functions. For the benchmarks described in the next section, an
alternative approach is used, where the scenario is made accessible through the p4est
user pointer. In order to make this possible, the extended interface has to be used for
resource changes. Nevertheless, the parameters describing the resource change are not
set here either in order to evaluate the performance in the most general use case.
Processes that have to terminate after the resource change will have the grid set to
NULL after calling the resource adaptation function, and can use this as an indicator
to exit or return to an idle state. After the resource change is completed, the grid is
repartitioned in order to keep the workload equally balanced over all processes.
At the end of every phase, the current simulation state is written to an output file.
The result is a fully adaptive simulation of the shallow water equations on an adaptive
grid using dynamic processes. Figure 5.3 shows one frame from a three dimensional
scenario, and Figure 5.4 two snapshots from a two dimensional simulation. The visualization has been created with ParaView [2].
5.2.2. Performance Evaluation
The performance and efficiency of the changes made to p4est during this thesis are
evaluated by comparing benchmark results from a total of nine different combinations
for mesh refinement and dynamic resource usage.
The mesh refinement using p4est is used in three different configurations:
1. Fixed Grid: These benchmarks show the effect of dynamic resource management
with constant workload. These results are only influenced by the dynamic resource
management, without the additional factor of changing workload per core.
A uniform grid with 410 = 1048576 cells is used.
2. Split by Four Grid: Here, the grid is refined uniformly in regular intervals. Therefore,
the workload is evenly distributed over all cores and increases exponentially over
the time of the simulation. This is used to evaluate the scaling of the extensions
made.
During the simulation, the number of cells increases from 4
6 = 4096 to 411 =
4194304.
3. Adaptive Grid: This represents the real-world use case for dynamic grids, refining
and coarsening the grid dynamically according to the current simulation state.
The number of cells varies between 47 = 16384 and 411 = 4194304.
47
5. Evaluation
(a) Simulation at t = 5s, with 83785 quadrants on six processes
(b) Simulation at t = 8s, with 116248 quadrants on twelve processes
Figure 5.4.: Simulation of the shallow water equations on an adaptive grid using dynamic
resource management on libmpidynres. As the wave propagates over the
domain, the grid is further refined and the number of processes is adapted
to the growing workload. The colors indicate the processes used by the grid.
48
5.2. Example Application: SWE on p4est
These cases for the grid are combined with five configurations for dynamic resource
management:
1. Constant #Processes: This is the reference case without dynamic resource management. All other results are compared to this basic reference.
A total number of 56 processes on two nodes is used.
2. Increasing #Processes: The basic approach to evaluating dynamic resource management using only the common MPI interface. At startup time, a constant number of
processes is allocated, from which different subsets are used for simulation while
the rest is in an idle state until they are activated by the application.
The number of processes used here increases steadily from 46 to 56 on two nodes.
3. libmpidynres: Here, the extensions made to libmpidynres are used to emulate the
simulation using the MPI Sessions interface.
The behavior is the same as for the Increasing #Processes case, except that one
process is required for the runtime environment, so that the number of processes
available for the simulation increases steadily from 45 to 55 on two nodes.
4. Decreasing libmpidynres: This is the reverse of the previous configuration, using
libmpidynres to reduce the application size from 55 to 45 processes on two nodes.
5. Adaptive #Processes: This is the intended use case for dynamic resource management
on adaptive grids, changing the number of processes used according to the current
workload, measured by the total number of cells in the grid. For managing
dynamic resources, libmpidynres is used.
The number of processes used for the simulation varies between 45 and 55 on two
nodes.
These configurations are combined in order to create nine benchmarks, as shown in
Table 5.1.
Table 5.1.: The benchmarks used for evaluating the changes to p4est and libmpidynres
Fixed Grid Split by Four Grid Adaptive Grid
Constant #Processes X X (X)
Increasing #Processes X X
libmpidynres X X
Decreasing libmpidynres X
Adaptive #Processes (X)
The fully adaptive benchmark is not presented here, as the high adaptivity requires
a very high number of phases in order to avoid unfeasible execution times caused by
refining the grid by a high factor while still on a low number of processes. Because
of this, this benchmark can only be executed with lower workload, what makes the
49
5. Evaluation
measurements very unprecise. Therefore, it can only be used to show that the adaptation
procedures work, what is already done by the both mpidynres example applications. All
relevant performance data can be seen from the separate benchmarks for adding and
removing resources.
All benchmarks compute 200s domain time of the radial dam break scenario described
in the previous section. The simulation is split into ten phases, where after every phase
the resources and the grid are adapted according to the configuration of the benchmark.
The only exception to this are the benchmarks using a Split by Four grid, where the
refinement of the mesh only takes place after every second phase in order to maintain a
reasonable number of cells.
For every benchmark, after every phase the following measures are logged:
• The current total number of cells over all processes
• The current number of processes
• The number of iterations computed during the previous phase
• The total time needed to compute all iterations of the previous phase, including
the iteration over the grid, the actual computation, and the creation and exchange
of the ghost layer between two iterations
• The time overhead required by p4est for refining, coarsening, and rebalancing the
grid after the last phase
• The time overhead required for the dynamic resource management, including the
time for requesting and allocating or freeing processes and the time needed to
synchronize the simulation state over all processes
• The time for repartitioning the grid after every adaption cycle
As the number of iterations in every phase is not constant, but depends on the refinement
level of the grid and the wave speeds in the simulation, the time per iteration is used for
assessing the performance of the simulation.
The final results shown in the following section were obtained by computing the
average values from three separate executions of every benchmark.
5.2.3. Benchmark Results
Constant vs. increasing number of processes on a fixed grid Figure 5.5 shows the
time per iteration for a simulation on a fixed grid with both a constant and an increasing
number of processes. For the increasing number of processes, one process is added after
every phase, where the number of iterations in a phase is indicated by the numbers
inside the bars. The reference simulation with constant resources is shown in the striped
bars, and the dotted ones refer to the benchmark with an increasing number of processes.
50
5.2. Example Application: SWE on p4est
1 (56 / 47)2 (56 / 48)3 (56 / 49)4 (56 / 50)5 (56 / 51)6 (56 / 52)7 (56 / 53)8 (56 / 54)9 (56 / 55)
10 (56 / 56)
Simulation Phase (static #processes / increasing #processes)
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Time in seconds
1944
1892
1867
1811
1782
1856
1794
1891
1840
1803
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.5e-02
1.5e-02
1.5e-02
1.5e-02
1.5e-02
1.4e-02
1.4e-02
1.4e-02
1.4e-02
1.3e-02
5.3e-03
4.3e-03
5.9e-03
5.3e-03
5.7e-03
5.7e-03
5.7e-03
4.9e-03
5.4e-03
5.4e-03
3.3e-02
1.1e-02
1.6e-02
1.2e-02
1.7e-02
1.6e-02
1.6e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
Constant #Processes vs.
Increasing #Processes
on a Fixed Grid
const. #procs
Time for 1 iter
inc. #procs
Time for 1 iter
Partition time
Dynamic MPI
Figure 5.5.: Constant #Processes vs. Increasing #Processes on a Fixed Grid.
The results for a Constant #Processes are shown with lined bars, the ones for
Increasing #Processes are shown in the dotted ones. The number inside the
bars for the time for one iteration indicate the number of iterations for every
phase. The time shown in brown is required for repartitioning the grid after
the resource change, and the overhead shown in purple includes the time
that is required for creating the new communicator and migrating the grid
structure.
The time overhead resulting from adapting the resources after every phase is shown in
purple, the additional overhead for repartitioning the grid in brown.
As expected, the iteration time is approximately constant for a fixed amount of processes, and reduces linearly when adding more processes. In the last phase, the number
of processes is the same for both datasets, so the time per iteration is approximately the
same as well.
The most interesting part of this graph is the overhead created by the use of dynamic
resources. In this naive approach of using different subsets of a fixed amount of
processes, the overhead for the first resource change is the largest. This is to be expected,
as some of the MPI objects used for creating the new, larger communicator are created
in the first phase and only modified afterwards. In the following phases, the overhead
increases, when the grid that needs to be synchronized is distributed over more processes
and therefore larger and if the manipulated MPI objects increase in size. On the other
hand, higher parallelism increases the performance of the synchronization operations.
51
5. Evaluation
In combination, both effects result in the observed behavior of a rather uniform overhead
with only minor variations.
The time required for repartitioning the grid stays approximately constant as well,
because the number of processes not change enough compared to the number of cells
that have to be transferred to have a greater effect. This time is only shown for the
benchmark with dynamic resources here, since the other one works with a constant
number of processes on a fixed grid and therefore does not need repartitioning.
During all of this, the total time overhead consisting of the repartitioning time and the
time for the resource adaptation stays quite low compared to the benefits of dynamic
resource management. If the higher overhead in the first phase is ignored, the average
overhead corresponds to approximately 1.3 additional iterations, what is more than
compensated by the resulting performance improvement, especially when considering
the high iteration counts in every phase.
Furthermore, this number includes the repartitioning operation, which is necessary
whenever the grid is refined non-uniformly. Therefore, this time is required by any
real-world application working on an adaptive grid, so it can not be seen as part of the
overhead for dynamic resource management in situations other than this benchmark.
The time for only requesting the resource change, creating the new communicator, and
migrating the grid corresponds to only approximately 0.97 iterations.
With this result, it can be concluded that the mechanisms for dynamic resource usage
introduced to p4est are easily efficient enough to bring high improvements to the overall
computation time of the application.
Constant vs. increasing number of processes using libmpidynres on a fixed grid This
benchmark is largely the same as the first one presented, the only difference is that the
naive approach of allocating a fixed amount of processes and running the simulation on
different subsets of this is replaced by the extended libmpidynres library emulating the
MPI Session runtime environment. To be noted here is that the libmpidynres scheduler
runs in an extra process, so the number of processes in every phase of the simulation
using libmpidynres is by one lower than with the Increasing #Processes.
As seen in Figure 5.6, while the iteration times and the repartitioning time are
approximately equivalent to the ones from the simulation with the naive approach, the
overhead for dynamic resource management looks quite different.
First, the overhead for the initial resource change is much lower, because the initializations required by the naive approach are done when starting up the libmpidynres
runtime environment. Second, the average overhead is slightly higher and varies
stronger. This is a necessary tradeoff for outsourcing the resource management to an
external scheduler: While the native approach hardcoded the resource changes after
every step, the MPI Sessions environment provided by libmpidynres runs in an extra
process and receives resource change requests via MPI messages, which have to be
interpreted and passed on to the scheduler manager to actually perform the desired
resource change. This is necessary for real-world applications, where a large number of
52
5.2. Example Application: SWE on p4est
1 (56 / 46)2 (56 / 47)3 (56 / 48)4 (56 / 49)5 (56 / 50)6 (56 / 51)7 (56 / 52)8 (56 / 53)9 (56 / 54)
10 (56 / 55)
Simulation Phase (static #processes / mpidynres #processes)
0.00
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
Time in seconds
1944
1892
1867
1811
1782
1856
1794
1891
1840
1803
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.3e-02
1.6e-02
1.5e-02
1.5e-02
1.5e-02
1.4e-02
1.4e-02
1.4e-02
1.4e-02
1.3e-02
1.4e-02
5.9e-03
4.5e-03
6.9e-03
6.2e-03
5.8e-03
6.2e-03
6.4e-03
6.4e-03
6.5e-03
6.3e-03
3.1e-02
1.9e-02
8.2e-03
2.5e-02
2.3e-02
2.2e-02
1.6e-02
2.4e-02
1.9e-02
2.1e-02
Constant #Processes vs.
libmpidynres
on a Fixed Grid
const. #procs
Time for 1 iter
libmpidynres
Time for 1 iter
Partition time
Dynamic MPI
Figure 5.6.: Constant #Processes vs. libmpidynres using a Fixed Grid.
The striped bars show the results for Constant #Processes, the dotted ones
for libmpidynres. The numbers inside the bars for the time per iteration
indicate the number of iterations in every phase. The time shown in brown
is required for repartitioning the grid after the resource change, and the
overhead shown in purple includes the time that is required for creating the
new communicator and migrating the grid structure.
programs must be able to retrieve resource changes from a shared runtime environment,
in contrast to the naive approach where the application itself managed its own resources
in a very rigid way.
Despite the higher complexity required for resource management in multi-user applications, the overhead increases only slightly compared to the naive approach, in
average by 0.006s, resulting in an average overhead corresponding to 1.1 iterations.
Therefore, the overhead is still very low when taking the number of iterations per phase
into account, so also the practically more relevant implementation of dynamic resource
management shows great advantages compared to a version without dynamic resource
management. These numbers again do not include the time required for repartitioning
the grid, as this time is not only required for dynamic resource management.
53
5. Evaluation
1 (56 / 55)2 (56 / 54)3 (56 / 53)4 (56 / 52)5 (56 / 51)6 (56 / 50)7 (56 / 49)8 (56 / 48)9 (56 / 47)
10 (56 / 46)
Simulation Phase (static #processes / decreasing #processes)
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
Time in seconds
1944
1892
1867
1811
1782
1856
1794
1891
1840
1803
1.3e-02
1.4e-02
1.4e-02
1.4e-02
1.4e-02
1.5e-02
1.5e-02
1.5e-02
1.6e-02
1.6e-02
1.3e-02
1.4e-02
1.4e-02
1.4e-02
1.4e-02
1.5e-02
1.5e-02
1.5e-02
1.6e-02
1.6e-02
1.1e-02
8.0e-03
2.4e-03
8.5e-03
7.0e-03
6.8e-03
7.5e-04
6.6e-03
6.9e-03
6.0e-03
1.2e-02
6.2e-03
6.0e-03
6.5e-03
5.9e-03
6.0e-03
9.2e-03
9.0e-03
8.9e-03
8.8e-03
Constant #Processes vs.
Decreasing libmpidynres
on a Fixed Grid
const. #procs
Time for 1 iter
dec. libmpidynres
Time for 1 iter
Partition time
Dynamic MPI
Figure 5.7.: Constant #Processes vs. Decreasing libmpidynres using a Fixed Grid.
The striped bars show the results for Constant #Processes, the dotted ones
for Decreasing libmpidynres. The numbers inside the bars for the time per
iteration indicate the number of iterations in every phase. The time shown
in brown is required for repartitioning the grid after the resource change,
and the overhead shown in purple includes the time that is required for
creating the new communicator and migrating the grid structure.
Constant vs. decreasing number of processes on a fixed grid As expected, the
behavior when removing resources is largely the same as when adding resources. At
the beginning, the time per iteration is approximately the same for both benchmarks,
later it increases as more processes are removed.
The overhead for dynamic resource management are by far smaller that when adding
resources, because the initialization and synchronization of the grid is not necessary.
This leads to the very low overhead corresponding to approximately 0.54 iterations.
The main work after removing resources is done by repartitioning the grid. As
the resource change function itself performs a simplified repartitioning operation,
depending on the current set of processes, either almost no repartitioning is required, or
the repartitioning function has to move more cells than usually. This leads to the highly
variable partitioning time seen in this benchmark.
As a conclusion it can be said that the overhead for dynamic resource management
is even lower when removing resources compared to the inverse operation, as the
repartitioning is part of most real-world application anyways.
54
5.2. Example Application: SWE on p4est
1 (56 / 48 / 16384)2 (56 / 50 / 65536)
3 (56 / 52 / 262144)
4 (56 / 54 / 1048576)5 (56 / 56 / 4194304)
Simulation Phase (static #processes / dynamic #processes / #quadrants)
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
Time in seconds
108212
426
851
1690
1.6e-04
2.8e-04
9.4e-04
3.4e-03
1.3e-02
1.9e-04
3.8e-04
1.0e-03
3.6e-03
1.3e-02
7.7e-04
1.3e-03
3.4e-03
8.8e-03
3.2e-02
1.0e-03
1.9e-03
5.0e-03
1.4e-02
5.1e-02
1.0e-02
1.2e-02
1.5e-02
1.2e-02
1.4e-02
Constant #Processes vs.
Increasing #Processes
on a Split by Four Grid
const. #procs
Time for 1 iter
Refinement time
Partition time
inc. #procs
Time for 1 iter
Refinement time
Partition time
Dynamic MPI
Figure 5.8.: Constant #Processes vs. Increasing #Processes on a Split by Four Grid.
The striped bars show the results for a Constant #Processes, the dotted ones for
Increasing #Processes. The numbers inside the bars for the time per iteration
indicate the number of iterations for every phase. The refinement time states
the overhead required for refining, coarsening, and rebalancing the grid, and
the pink and brown bars stacked to them show the time that is required for
repartitioning. The dynamic MPI overhead includes requesting the resource
change, creating the new communicator, and migrating the grid structure.
Constant vs. increasing number of processes on a split by four grid This benchmark
uses the same configuration for process management as the first one, but the number
of cells is increased by factor 4 after every second phase. Thus, the workload increases
exponentially every second phase. For simplicity, only these phases are shown here.
Figure 5.8 shows the time per iteration for both static and increasing numbers of
processes, as well as the iteration count in every phase like the previous figure. The
overhead generated by refining the grid is depicted in green and red for static and
increasing process numbers, respectively, the values stacked on these bars show the
time for repartitioning the grid. The additional time required for dynamic resource
management is shown in purple. The graph uses a logarithmic scale for the time axis in
order to be able to display the iteration times clearly despite the exponential growth of
the workload.
55
5. Evaluation
As seen in the first benchmark, the iteration time of the simulation using an increasing
number of processes converges to the iteration time of the reference application as the
numbers of processes of both configurations become equal. As expected, the iteration
times grow exponentially, and therefore linearly with respect to the workload.
The overhead for refining and rebalancing the grid after every second phase also
grows linearly with the number of cells and exponentially in the phase. This growth of
course can not be fully compensated by adding two processes after every refinement
cycle, but the effect of adding processes is visible in how the overhead grows linearly
slower when using dynamic processes.
While the repartitioning time is close to zero for the simulation with a constant number
of processes, it increases exponentially for the benchmark with dynamic resources. The
reason for this is that the grid itself is refined uniformly, so it does not have to be
repartitioned unless the grid has to be redistributed to a higher number of processes.
While this adds overhead for this benchmark, simulations using non-uniformly refining
grids require more repartitioning effort independent of the resources used, so the
difference would be much smaller in a real-world application.
Adding new processes is done in rather constant time during most of the phases. Only
the first phase, which is not shown here, creates a higher overhead as explained for the
first benchmark, and towards the last phase the effect of the increasing workload that
requires a larger grid to be synchronized can be seen. During all of this, the overhead
is quite constant, increasing only by approximately 0.003s when going from 4096 to
4194304 cells.
Constant vs. increasing number of processes using libmpidynres on a split by four
grid This benchmark largely corresponds to the previous one, the only difference
is that instead of the naive approach for emulating dynamic resource management
libmpidynres is used. This also means that the number of worker processes again is
lower for the simulation on libmpidynres than when using the naive approach, as already
described for the second benchmark.
The results are a combination of the previous ones, showing the same behavior for the
time per iteration and the overhead for refining the grid as the previous benchmark. The
overhead required by libmpidynres is again a little higher than for the first approach,
but largely behaves the same otherwise: While it has larger variations, it also stays at
approximately the same level during the whole simulation.
Thereby, the last benchmark confirms the results obtained above in a more practically relevant environment, and shows that the implemented mechanisms for dynamic
resource usage with MPI Sessions for simulations using p4est can be used to create
a great improvement on the performance and efficiency of the application while only
introducing a very low overhead, and scale well over larger process sets and higher grid
sizes.
56
5.3. Discussion
1 (56 / 47 / 16384)2 (56 / 49 / 65536)
3 (56 / 51 / 262144)
4 (56 / 53 / 1048576)5 (56 / 55 / 4194304)
Simulation Phase (static #processes / mpidynres #processes / #quadrants)
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
Time in seconds
108212
426
851
1690
1.6e-04
2.8e-04
9.4e-04
3.4e-03
1.3e-02
1.9e-04
3.8e-04
1.1e-03
3.7e-03
1.4e-02
7.7e-04
1.3e-03
3.4e-03
8.8e-03
3.2e-02
8.5e-04
1.7e-03
4.0e-03
1.1e-02
3.8e-02
1.7e-02
2.4e-02
2.1e-02
2.4e-02
2.2e-02
Constant #Processes vs.
libmpidynres
on a Split by Four Grid
const. #procs
Time for 1 iter
Refinement time
Partition time
libmpidynres
Time for 1 iter
Refinement time
Partition time
Dynamic MPI
Figure 5.9.: Constant #Processes vs. libmpidynres on a Split by Four Grid.
The striped bars show the results for a Constant #Processes, the dotted ones
for libmpidynres. The numbers inside the bars for the time per iteration
indicate the number of iterations for every phase. The refinement time states
the overhead required for refining, coarsening, and rebalancing the grid, and
the pink and brown bars stacked to them show the time that is required for
repartitioning. The dynamic MPI overhead includes requesting the resource
change, creating the new communicator, and migrating the grid structure.
5.3. Discussion
The application shown here uses libmpidynres to demonstrate the usage of dynamic
resource adaptation with p4est. The benchmark results obtained from this application
and shown in the previous section indicate that the time overhead for adapting the
resources of the application and migrating the grid is very low, in the range of only a
few iterations. Yet, this demonstration is idealized compared to a real-world system.
First, the resource manager used is integrated into libmpidynres. This means that
there are no other applications accessing the same resource manager. Because of this,
it can not happen that the response of the resource manager is delayed by waiting for
other applications.
57
5. Evaluation
Also, there are no other programs competing about the limited resources. Since all
processes that are available to the mpidynres environment can only be used by a single
program, the resource manager only has to take the total number of available processes
into account when handling resource change queries, while in a production environment
it would also have to consider resources used by other applications, and maybe wait for
resources that are about to be released or even take away resources from other programs
in order to be able to provide the necessary number of cores.
For all of the above cases, the resource management not only requires more effort
from the runtime environment, but the resource manager also has to wait for other
processes to react to proposed resource changes or finish data migration to a new set of
processes. This can lead to a large delay while performing resource changes, what in
turn slows down the user application waiting for these changes.
Furthermore, the resource changes performed in all benchmarks create sets of processes with subsequent MPI ranks. Because of this, the application is not fragmented
at all, what has a positive effect on the performance of all communication. In production environments where many applications run on the same large cluster, it is hardly
possible to perform resource changes without creating fragmentation, because the cores
located close to the application might already be reserved by other users. This can be
resolved by replacing the used resources of all applications in the cluster appropriately,
what in turn requires additional effort.
The presented applications do not demonstrate the replacement of resources, as
libmpidynres currently does not support this and it does not bring any benefit when
running the application on a continuous set of processes that is not distributed over a
larger system. Yet, especially replacing resources requires much time and is implemented
not optimally in p4est. The main reason why replacing resources is especially expensive
is that the grid is first reduced to span only the processes kept over the replacement
operation and then extended to the newly added resources. This requires an additional
repartitioning step and forces the grid to work on a potentially very low number of
processes during the operation. Therefore, replacing resources requires a higher effort
than removing and adding ones. Yet, this operation is very common in production
environments where it is used to defragment the application.
Altogether, these differences to real-world systems lead to the benchmarks showing higher performance than one would observe in production environments. While
especially the higher fragmentation of the application and the process replacement
operations required to overcome it can not be avoided completely, the effect of other
applications competing for resources can be minimized using appropriate techniques
for latency hiding.
The main idea behind this is that the application can ask for resource changes, and
instead of waiting for a response, it can continue with the simulation until it is notified
by the resource manager. This avoids the problems of having to wait for the response of
the resource manager and for resource changes and migration of other applications by
using the waiting time productively.
58
5.3. Discussion
As a conclusion it can be said that while the presented benchmarks do not show the
behavior of the resource adaptation procedures in production environments directly,
they come close to it if additional optimizations are used, and therefore they might not
give exact values, but they do provide an approximate impression of the magnitude of
the created overhead and the performance gains.
59

6. Conclusion and Future Work
This thesis implemented functions for dynamic resource adaptation for p4est and
extended the libmpidynres simulation layer by a provisory function for requesting user
defined resource changes.
The extensions to p4est make it possible to run simulations on static or adaptive grids
on changing resources, where the used interface provides the highest possible flexibility
in order to account for all possible use cases, ranging from adjusting the resources of an
application to the current workload to defragmenting the application on a larger cluster,
using functions for adding and removing resources separately or directly replacing the
used MPI communicator.
These operations can be combined with the MPI Sessions model, which is simulated
by libmpidynres. This work adds a new testing function to this library that allows the
user to control performed resource changes directly.
Different example applications demonstrating the use of the new p4est functionality
in both a standalone implementation and with MPI Sessions using libmpidynres are
presented. Time measurements from different configurations for fixed or dynamic grids
and resource management approaches are used to evaluate the performance of the
resulting application and show that the overhead for resource adaptation is very low.
Yet of course, more work remains to be done.
The implemented functionality for removing resources does not yet support using
a weight function for distributing the quadrants from removed processes, instead, a
compromise keeping the original distribution as far as possible is used. The interface
already includes a parameter for passing such a function, but it is currently ignored.
Adding this feature will be the next step to take and will complete the extension of the
p4est library.
On the other hand, p4est is only one of many frameworks used in scientific computing.
In order to make it possible that all or at least the most applications running on
supercomputers use dynamic resource management, all major libraries have to be
adapted, for example linear algebra solvers.
Also, the functionality of libmpidynres is quite limited at this point of time. For
example, it does not yet support the standardized functions for controlling the resource
usage from the user application. While a very basic solution for this was implemented
in this thesis, for simulations in production environments more complex approaches
are necessary, deciding on the resource change based on complex functions including
for example the current workload and its change over the previous phases and its
extrapolation to the future.
61
6. Conclusion and Future Work
Another feature missing in the mpidynres library is the direct replacing of processes.
While this can be simulated by issuing separate adding and removal requests, it would
be desirable to have a single, combined function for this available. This also includes
more detailed control over the resource change, enabling the user to specify the exact
ranks of the processes to be substituted in order to allow optimizations based on the
physical topology of the compute nodes and the network.
As long as libmpidynres only allows to run a single user application inside the
simulated environment, this can not bring any performance improvement compared
to an application using static resources, as all resources allocated by the runtime
environment are not available for other applications. So, the simulation layer would
have to be extended to allow multiple programs to run inside the same environment,
where they could actually share the same resources.
The final step to be done is an implementation of the MPI Sessions standard as a
part of an MPI environment. This would allow to run the user application directly
on the hardware, eliminating the need for an additional simulation layer and wrapper
functions setting up the environment inside the user application.
These further tasks are necessary until dynamic resource usage can be productively
used for high performance computing applications. Therefore, it will still take a long
time until this highly promising technique will become reality.
62
A. Software Development Aspects
A.1. Software Tools Used
The extensions made to p4est and libmpidynres are written in the C programming
language, all example applications, benchmarks, and the test suite use C++. For this, the
compilers from the GNU Compiler Collection were used [12].
For debugging, mainly the GNU Debugger was used [13], but also the Arm DDT [1]
running on the Linux Cluster of the Leibnitz Rechenzentrum [22]. Valgrind memcheck
[34] was used for detecting memory access errors and possible memory leaks.
The documentation for the source code was written using Doxygen [9], and integrated
to the already existing documentation for the extended libraries.
The code is compiled using the existing GNU Make [16] system of p4est and
libmpidynres. For the example applications, the benchmarks, and the test suite, the
Python-based build system SCons [27] is used, as it provides the full power of the Python
programming language and therefore allows to create highly flexible build options for
selecting the configuration to be built.
For organizing the code, the version control system git [15] was used [29]. The MPI
implementation used for development, testing, and evaluating was OpenMPI [24].
The example simulations are visualized using ParaView [2], and the benchmark results
were plotted using matplotlib [19].
A.2. Hardware Used
The main development was done on a Linux machine using an AMD Ryzen 7 4750
processor. This was also used to create the simulation snapshots shown in the following
sections.
For evaluating the performance, the benchmarks were executed on the CoolMUC2 of
the Linux Cluster from the Leibnitz Rechenzentrum [8, 22].
A.3. Code Structure
The software repository is structured in three main parts, containing the extended
versions of p4est and libmpidynres and the example code.
The latter is located in the applications/ directory and organized in different directories for the scenarios, the SWE solver, the VTK writer, auxiliary functions, and the
main example applications.
63
A. Software Development Aspects
The extended p4est and the extended libmpidynres libraries are located in the p4est/
and libmpidynres/ directories.
Table A.1.: Directory listing of the project repository
File Description
p4est/ Extended version of the p4est library
sc/ Helper library libsc, not changed in
this thesis
src/p4est.c Main implementation file for p4est
src/p4est.h Header file for the p4est.c
src/p8est.h Header file for the adaptation functions
in three dimensional grids
src/p4est_to_p8est.h Macros for transforming the functions
from p4est.c to the three dimensional
interfaces in p8est.h
libmpidynres/ Extended version of the libmpidynres
library
src/mpidynres.[c,h] Main implementation and header files
src/scheduler.[c,h] The scheduler running in the background
src/scheduler_handler.[c,h] The scheduler handler
src/scheduler_mgmt.h Header file for the main resource manager functionality
src/managers/user_request_manager.c Implementation of the user request
manager
applications/ Example applications, benchmarks and
tests
scenarios/ Scenarios for simulation
writer/ Code for writing the simulation state to
VTK files
tools/ Helper functions for parsing cli parameters
examples/ Example applications
benchmarks/ The benchmarks
tests/ The test suite
64
B. Usage
B.1. Compiling and Installing
B.1.1. p4est
The extended p4est library can be built and installed using the same procedure as for
the original code. It uses the GNU autoconf/automake/libtool tool chain and supports
various options for compiling, some of which are explained in the p4est-howto document
[6].
All compile options can be found in the p4est/INSTALL file.
A common way to compile p4est for running the example code is to run
./configure --enable-mpi && make && make install
from the p4est/ directory. Depending on the environment, it might be useful to omit
the linking against the linear algebra package that can be used by p4est if required by
the user application. This is done by adding the -without-blas option to the configure
call.
The library is installed to p4est/local/lib/, so the LD_LIBRARY_PATH environment
variable has to be adapted accordingly. If desired, the install path can be changed using
another argument for the configure script.
B.1.2. libmpidynres
The libmpidynres simulation layer can be compiled by calling make && make install
from the libmpidynres/ directory. The default install path is in /usr/, but can be altered
by editing the libmpidynres/Makefile. Complete build instructions can be found in the
libmpidynres/README.md.
B.1.3. Example Applications
The example applications use the SCons build system, which has to be installed previously. After this, the code can be compiled by calling scons from the applications/
directory.
The available options are:
• -h: Print information about the compile options
• buildDir: Optional parameter for the build directory, default is applications/build/
65
B. Usage
• example: Which application to build. Possible values are:
– incProcs: The example simulation using the naive approach for Increasing
#Processes on a two dimensional adaptive grid
– mpidynres2d: The two dimensional example simulation using libmpidynres
for adaptive resource management on an adaptive grid
– mpidynres3d: Same as above, but in three dimensions
– benchConstProcsFixed: The benchmark using a Constant #Processes on a Fixed
Grid
– benchConstProcsSplit: The benchmark using a Constant #Processes on a Split
by Four Grid
– benchConstProcsAdapt: The benchmark using a Constant #Processes on an
Adaptive Grid
– benchIncProcsFixed: The benchmark using an Increasing #Processes on a Fixed
Grid
– benchIncProcsSplit: The benchmark using an Increasing #Processes on a Split
by Four Grid
– benchMpidynresFixed: The benchmark using libmpidynres on a Fixed Grid
– benchMpidynresSplit: The benchmark using libmpidynres on a Split by Four
Grid
– benchDecMpidynresFixed: The benchmark using Decreasing libmpidynres on a
Fixed Grid
– benchAdapt: The benchmark using an Adaptive #Processes on an Adaptive Grid
– tests: The test suite
The default value is mpidynres2d.
• compileMode: How to compile the examples, can be debug or release, default
value is release
• netCDF: Whether to use the netCDF library which is required for reading scenarios
from files. Default value is false.
• netCDFDir: Location of the netCDF library, if it should be used and is not installed
at the default path.
For example, the three dimensional application could be compiled in debug mode
using
scons example=mpidynres3d compileMode=debug
66
B.2. Executing the Example Code
B.2. Executing the Example Code
After compiling them, the example applications are located at applications/build/,
unless a different build path has been specified explicitly. For running the applications,
different options are available.
B.2.1. Examples
The examples accept the following parameters:
• -s SCENARIO: The scenario to be simulated. For the two dimensional examples,
this can be either dambreak or artificial, the default value is dambreak. This
option is not available for the three dimensional example.
• -b BATHYMETRY: The path to a netCDF file containing bathymetry data to be used as
the scenario. This option can only be used for the two dimensional examples, and
the example has to be compiled with netCDF=true. Has to be used in combination
with -d, and overwrites the -s option.
• -d DISPLACEMENT: The path to a netCDF file containing data about the displacement in the bathymetry that should be used as the scenario. Has to be used
together with -b.
• -o OUTPUT_BASEPATH: The base name of the output files written. This parameter is
mandatory and has no default value.
• -t TIME: The time to be simulated. Default value is 200, the unit are seconds.
• -c PHASES: The number of phases the simulation is divided into. After every
phase, the grid and the resources are adapted, and an output file is written.
• -h: Print usage information.
An example execution for the two dimensional simulation for 100s with 50 phases
would be calling
.build/SWE_p4est_mpidynres2d_release -t 100 -c 50 -o output_file
from the applications/ directory.
B.2.2. Benchmarks
The benchmarks use less parameters, as the scenario is fixed and no output files are
written. The existing parameters are mainly used for controlling the execution time
when testing the benchmarks.
The supported parameters are:
• -t TIME: The time to be simulated, default value is 200, the unit is seconds.
67
B. Usage
• -c PHASES: The number of phases used. After every phases, the grid and the
resources are adapted. The default value is 200, but the benchmark results
presented in this thesis were obtained using 10 phases.
• -h: Print usage information.
An example execution of the benchmark using libmpidynres on a Split by Four Grid as
presented in this thesis, called from the applications/ directory, would be:
./build/SWE_p4est_benchMpidynresSplit_release -c 10
B.2.3. Test Suite
The test suite takes no parameters, and can be executed from the applications/ directory by calling
./build/SWE_p4est_tests_release
68
Bibliography
[1] ARM DDT (Official Website). url: https://www.arm.com/products/developmenttools/server-and-hpc/forge/ddt.
[2] U. Ayachit. The ParaView Guide. Kitware Inc., Feb. 2020. url: paraview.org.
[3] M. Berger and A. Leveque. “Adaptive Mesh Refinement Using Wave-Propagation
Algorithms for Hyperbolic Systems.” In: SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis 35
(Dec. 1997). doi: 10.1137/S0036142997315974.
[4] C. Burstedde, L. C. Wilcox, and O. Ghattas. “p4est: Scalable Algorithms for
Parallel Adaptive Mesh Refinement on Forests of Octrees.” In: SIAM Journal on
Scientific Computing 33.3 (2011), pp. 1103–1133. doi: 10.1137/100791634.
[5] C. Burstedde, L. C. Wilcox, and T. Isaac. p4est: Parallel AMR on Forests of Octrees.
July 2021. url: http://p4est.org/.
[6] C. Burstedde, L. C. Wilcox, and T. Isaac. The p4est software for parallel AMR Howto
document and step-by-step examples. Aug. 2014.
[7] M. Chadha, J. John, and M. Gerndt. Extending SLURM for Dynamic Resource-Aware
Adaptive Batch Scheduling. 2021. arXiv: 2009.08289 [cs.DC].
[8] CoolMUC 2 (Official Website). url: https : / / doku . lrz . de / display / PUBLIC /
CoolMUC-2.
[9] Doxygen (Official Website). url: https://www.doxygen.nl/index.html.
[10] K. El Maghraoui, T. J. Desell, B. K. Szymanski, and C. A. Varela. “Dynamic
Malleability in Iterative MPI Applications.” In: Seventh IEEE International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid (CCGrid ’07). 2007, pp. 591–598. doi:
10.1109/CCGRID.2007.45.
[11] J. Fecht. “A Simulation Layer for Dynamically Varying Computing Resources in
MPI.” Bachelor’s Thesis. Technical University of Munich, Apr. 2021.
[12] GCC, The GNU Compiler Collection (Official Website). url: https://gcc.gnu.org/.
[13] GDB: The GNU Debugger Project (Official Website). url: https://www.gnu.org/
software/gdb/.
[14] D. L. George. “Augmented Riemann solvers for the shallow water equations over
variable topography with steady states and inundation.” In: Journal of Computational Physics 227.6 (2008), pp. 3089–3113. issn: 0021-9991. doi: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jcp.2007.10.027. url: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0021999107004767.
69
Bibliography
[15] git (Official Website). url: https://git-scm.com/.
[16] GNU Make (Official Website). url: https://www.gnu.org/software/make/.
[17] A. Gupta, B. Acun, O. Sarood, and L. V. Kalé. “Towards realizing the potential of
malleable jobs.” In: 2014 21st International Conference on High Performance Computing
(HiPC). 2014, pp. 1–10. doi: 10.1109/HiPC.2014.7116905.
[18] D. Holmes, H. Pritchard, and N. Hjelm. Using PMIx to Help Replace MPI_Init. Nov.
2018.
[19] J. D. Hunter. “Matplotlib: A 2D graphics environment.” In: Computing in Science &
Engineering 9.3 (2007), pp. 90–95. doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55.
[20] S. Iserte, R. Mayo, E. S. Quintana-Orti, V. Beltran, and A. Peña. “DMR API:
Improving Cluster Productivity by Turning Applications into Malleable.” In:
Parallel Computing 78 (July 2018). doi: 10.1016/j.parco.2018.07.006.
[21] S. Iserte, R. Mayo, E. S. Quintana-Ortí, and A. J. Peña. “DMRlib: Easy-Coding
and Efficient Resource Management for Job Malleability.” In: IEEE Transactions on
Computers 70.9 (2021), pp. 1443–1457. doi: 10.1109/TC.2020.3022933.
[22] Leibnitz-Rechenzentum der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften (Official Website).
url: https://www.lrz.de/.
[23] Message Passing Interface Forum. MPI: A Message-Passing Interface Standard Version
4.0. June 2021. url: https : / / www . mpi - forum . org / docs / mpi - 4 . 0 / mpi40 -
report.pdf.
[24] Open MPI: Open Source High Performance Computing (Official Website). url: https:
//www.open-mpi.org/.
[25] W. Schroeder. The visualization toolkit : an object-oriented approach to 3D graphics.
Clifton Park, N.Y: Kitware, 2006. isbn: 9781930934191.
[26] M. Schulz and MPI Forum. The Final Steps to MPI 4.0 and What’s Next? Sept. 2020.
[27] SCons: A Software Construction Tool (Official Website). url: https://scons.org/.
[28] Shallow Water Equations Teaching Code. Dec. 2020. url: https://github.com/TUMI5/SWE.
[29] Software Repository of this Thesis. url: https://github.com/Maximilian57/p4est_
dynres.
[30] Solvers for the Shallow Water Equations. Mar. 2020. url: https://github.com/TUMI5/swe_solvers.
[31] J. Squyres. MPI Sessions: a proposal for the MPI Forum. Mar. 2016. url: https :
//blogs.cisco.com/performance/mpi- sessions- a- proposal- for- the- mpiforum.
70
Bibliography
[32] R. Sudarsan and C. J. Ribbens. “ReSHAPE: A Framework for Dynamic Resizing
and Scheduling of Homogeneous Applications in a Parallel Environment.” In:
2007 International Conference on Parallel Processing (ICPP 2007). 2007, pp. 44–44. doi:
10.1109/ICPP.2007.73.
[33] UCAR/Unidata. Network Common Data Form (NetCDF). doi: 10.5065/D6H70CW6.
[34] Valgrind User Manual. url: https://valgrind.org/docs/manual/mc-manual.html.
[35] J. Wozniak, M. Dorier, R. Ross, T. Shu, T. Kurc, L. Tang, N. Podhorszki, and M.
Wolf. “MPI jobs within MPI jobs: A practical way of enabling task-level faulttolerance in HPC workflows.” In: Future Generation Computer Systems 101 (May
2019). doi: 10.1016/j.future.2019.05.020.
71