Scheduling Multithreaded Computationsby Work StealingRobert D. BlumofeThe University of Texas at AustinCharles E. LeisersonMIT Laboratory for Computer ScienceAbstractThis paper studies the problem of eciently scheduling fully strict (i.e., wellstructured) multithreaded computations on parallel computers. A popular and practical method of scheduling this kind of dynamic MIMD-style computation is \workstealing," in which processors needing work steal computational threads from otherprocessors. In this paper, we give the rst provably good work-stealing scheduler formultithreaded computations with dependencies.Specically, our analysis shows that the expected time to execute a fully strictcomputation on P processors using our work-stealing scheduler is T1=P +O(T1), whereT1 is the minimum serial execution time of the multithreaded computation and T1 isthe minimum execution time with an innite number of processors. Moreover, thespace required by the execution is at most S1P , where S1 is the minimum serial spacerequirement. We also show that the expected total communication of the algorithm isat most O(P T1(1 + nd)Smax), where Smax is the size of the largest activation record ofany thread and nd is the maximum number of times that any thread synchronizes withits parent. This communication bound justies the folk wisdom that work-stealingschedulers are more communication ecient than their work-sharing counterparts. Allthree of these bounds are existentially optimal to within a constant factor.1 IntroductionFor ecient execution of a dynamically growing \multithreaded" computation on a MIMDstyle parallel computer, a scheduling algorithm must ensure that enough threads are activeconcurrently to keep the processors busy. Simultaneously, it should ensure that the numberof concurrently active threads remains within reasonable limits so that memory requirementsare not unduly large. Moreover, the scheduler should also try to maintain related threadsThis research was supported in part by the Advanced Research Pro jects Agency under Contract N00014-94-1-0985. This research was done while Robert D. Blumofe was at the MIT Laboratory for Computer Scienceand was supported in part by an ARPA High-Performance Computing Graduate Fellowship.1 on the same processor, if possible, so that communication between them can be minimized.Needless to say, achieving all these goals simultaneously can be dicult.Two scheduling paradigms have arisen to address the problem of scheduling multithreadedcomputations: work sharing and work stealing. In work sharing, whenever a processorgenerates new threads, the scheduler attempts to migrate some of them to other processorsin hopes of distributing the work to underutilized processors. In work stealing, however,underutilized processors take the initiative: they attempt to \steal" threads from otherprocessors. Intuitively, the migration of threads occurs less frequently with work stealingthan with work sharing, since when all processors have work to do, no threads are migratedby a work-stealing scheduler, but threads are always migrated by a work-sharing scheduler.The work-stealing idea dates back at least as far as Burton and Sleep's research on parallel execution of functional programs [16] and Halstead's implementation of Multilisp [30].These authors point out the heuristic benets of work stealing with regards to space andcommunication. Since then, many researchers have implemented variants on this strategy[11, 21, 23, 29, 34, 37, 46]. Rudolph, Slivkin-Allalouf, and Upfal [43] analyzed a randomized work-stealing strategy for load balancing independent jobs on a parallel computer, andKarp and Zhang [33] analyzed a randomized work-stealing strategy for parallel backtracksearch. Recently, Zhang and Ortynski [48] have obtained good bounds on the communicationrequirements of this algorithm.In this paper, we present and analyze a work-stealing algorithm for scheduling \fullystrict" (well-structured) multithreaded computations. This class of computations encompasses both backtrack search computations [33, 48] and divide-and-conquer computations [47],as well as dataow computations [2] in which threads may stall due to a data dependency.We analyze our algorithms in a stringent atomic-access model similar to the atomic messagepassing model of [36] in which concurrent accesses to the same data structure are seriallyqueued by an adversary.Our main contribution is a randomized work-stealing scheduling algorithm for fully strictmultithreaded computations which is provably ecient in terms of time, space, and communication. We prove that the expected time to execute a fully strict computation on Pprocessors using our work-stealing scheduler is T1=P + O(T1), where T1 is the minimumserial execution time of the multithreaded computation and T1 is the minimum executiontime with an innite number of processors. In addition, the space required by the executionis at most S1P , where S1 is the minimum serial space requirement. These bounds are better than previous bounds for work-sharing schedulers [10], and the work-stealing scheduleris much simpler and eminently practical. Part of this improvement is due to our focusing on fully strict computations, as compared to the (general) strict computations studiedin [10]. We also prove that the expected total communication of the execution is at mostO(P T1(1 + nd)Smax), where Smax is the size of the largest activation record of any threadand nd is the maximum number of times that any thread synchronizes with its parent. Thisbound is existentially tight to within a constant factor, meeting the lower bound of Wuand Kung [47] for communication in parallel divide-and-conquer. In contrast, work-sharingschedulers have nearly worst-case behavior for communication. Thus, our results bolster thefolk wisdom that work stealing is superior to work sharing.Others have studied and continue to study the problem of eciently managing the spacerequirements of parallel computations. Culler and Arvind [19] and Ruggiero and Sargeant2 [44] give heuristics for limiting the space required by dataow programs. Burton [14] showshow to limit space in certain parallel computations without causing deadlock. More recently,Burton [15] has developed and analyzed a scheduling algorithm with provably good time andspace bounds. Blelloch, Gibbons, Matias, and Narlikar [3, 4] have also recently developedand analyzed scheduling algorithms with provably good time and space bounds. It is notyet clear whether any of these algorithms are as practical as work stealing.The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we review the graphtheoretic model of multithreaded computations introduced in [10], which provides a theoretical basis for analyzing schedulers. Section 3 gives a simple scheduling algorithm whichuses a central queue. This \busy-leaves" algorithm forms the basis for our randomized workstealing algorithm, which we present in Section 4. In Section 5 we introduce the atomic-accessmodel that we use to analyze execution time and communication costs for the work-stealingalgorithm, and we present and analyze a combinatorial \balls and bins" game that we useto derive a bound on the contention that arises in random work stealing. We then use thisbound along with a delay-sequence argument [41] in Section 6 to analyze the execution timeand communication cost of the work-stealing algorithm. To conclude, in Section 7 we brieydiscuss how the theoretical ideas in this paper have been applied to the Cilk programminglanguage and runtime system [8, 25], as well as make some concluding remarks.2 A model of multithreaded computationThis section reprises the graph-theoretic model of multithreaded computation introducedin [10]. We also dene what it means for computations to be \fully strict." We concludewith a statement of the greedy-scheduling theorem, which is an adaptation of theorems byBrent [13] and Graham [27, 28] on dag scheduling.A multithreaded computation is composed of a set of threads, each of which is a sequential ordering of unit-time instructions. The instructions are connected by dependencyedges, which provide a partial ordering on which instructions must execute before whichother instructions. In Figure 1, for example, each shaded block is a thread with circlesrepresenting instructions and the horizontal edges, called continue edges, representing thesequential ordering. Thread 5 of this example contains 3 instructions: v10, v11, and v12.The instructions of a thread must execute in this sequential order from the rst (leftmost)instruction to the last (rightmost) instruction. In order to execute a thread, we allocate forit a chunk of memory, called an activation frame, that the instructions of the thread canuse to store the values on which they compute.A P -processor execution schedule for a multithreaded computation determines whichprocessors of a P -processor parallel computer execute which instructions at each step. Anexecution schedule depends on the particular multithreaded computation and the number Pof processors. In any given step of an execution schedule, each processor executes at mostone instruction.During the course of its execution, a thread may create, or spawn, other threads. Spawning a thread is like a subroutine call, except that the spawning thread can operate concurrently with the spawned thread. We consider spawned threads to be children of the threadthat did the spawning, and a thread may spawn as many children as it desires. In this way,3

v18 v19 v20 v1 v2

v3 v4

v16 v17 v21 v22 v23 v6 v9 v13 v14 v15 v5 v7 v10 v11 v12

Γ1

Γ2

Γ3 Γ4 Γ5

Γ6

v8Figure 1: A multithreaded computation. This computation contains 23 instructions v1; v2; : : : ; v23and 6 threads 1; 2; : : : ; 6.threads are organized into a spawn tree as indicated in Figure 1 by the downward-pointing,shaded dependency edges, called spawn edges, that connect threads to their spawned children. The spawn tree is the parallel analog of a call tree. In our example computation, thespawn tree's root thread 1 has two children, 2 and 6, and thread 2 has three children,3, 4, and 5. Threads 3, 4, 5, and 6, which have no children, are leaf threads.Each spawn edge goes from a specic instruction|the instruction that actually doesthe spawn operation|in the parent thread to the rst instruction of the child thread. Anexecution schedule must obey this edge in that no processor may execute an instruction ina spawned child thread until after the spawning instruction in the parent thread has beenexecuted. In our example computation (Figure 1), due to the spawn edge (v6; v7), instructionv7 cannot be executed until after the spawning instruction v6. Consistent with our unit-timemodel of instructions, a single instruction may spawn at most one child. When the spawninginstruction executes, it allocates an activation frame for the new child thread. Once a threadhas been spawned and its frame has been allocated, we say the thread is alive or living.When the last instruction of a thread executes, it deallocates its frame and the thread dies.An execution schedule generally respects other dependencies besides those representedby continue and spawn edges. Consider an instruction that produces a data value to beconsumed by another instruction. Such a producer/consumer relationship precludes theconsuming instruction from executing until after the producing instruction. To enforcesuch orderings, other dependency edges, called join edges, may be required, as shown inFigure 1 by the curved edges. If the execution of a thread arrives at a consuming instructionbefore the producing instruction has executed, execution of the consuming thread cannotcontinue|the thread stal ls. Once the producing instruction executes, the join dependency isresolved, which enables the consuming thread to resume its execution|the thread becomesready. A multithreaded computation does not model the means by which join dependenciesget resolved or by which unresolved join dependencies get detected. In implementation,resolution and detection can be accomplished using mechanisms such as join counters [8],futures [30], or I-structures [2].We make two technical assumptions regarding join edges. We rst assume that eachinstruction has at most a constant number of join edges incident on it. This assumption4 is consistent with our unit-time model of instructions. The second assumption is that nojoin edges enter the instruction immediately following a spawn. This assumption meansthat when a parent thread spawns a child thread, the parent cannot immediately stall. Itcontinues to be ready to execute for at least one more instruction.An execution schedule must obey the constraints given by the spawn, continue, and joinedges of the computation. These dependency edges form a directed graph of instructions,and no processor may execute an instruction until after all of the instruction's predecessorsin this graph have been executed. So that execution schedules exist, this graph must beacyclic. That is, it must be a directed acyclic graph, or dag. At any given step of anexecution schedule, an instruction is ready if all of its predecessors in the dag have beenexecuted.We make the simplifying assumption that a parent thread remains alive until all itschildren die, and thus, a thread does not deallocate its activation frame until all its children'sframes have been deallocated. Although this assumption is not absolutely necessary, it givesthe execution a natural structure, and it will simplify our analyses of space utilization. Inaccounting for space utilization, we also assume that the frames hold all the values used bythe computation; there is no global storage available to the computation outside the frames(or if such storage is available, then we do not account for it). Therefore, the space usedat a given time in executing a computation is the total size of all frames used by all livingthreads at that time, and the total space used in executing a computation is the maximumsuch value over the course of the execution.To summarize, a multithreaded computation can be viewed as a dag of instructions connected by dependency edges. The instructions are connected by continue edges into threads,and the threads form a spawn tree with the spawn edges. When a thread is spawned, anactivation frame is allocated and this frame remains allocated as long as the thread remainsalive. A living thread may be either ready or stalled due to an unresolved dependency.A given multithreaded program when run on a given input can sometimes generate morethan one multithreaded computation. In that case, we say the program is nondeterministic. If the same multithreaded computation is generated by the program on the inputno matter how the computation is scheduled, then the program is deterministic. In thispaper, we shall analyze multithreaded computations, not multithreaded programs. Speci-cally, we shall not worry about how the multithreaded computation is generated. Instead,we shall study its properties in an a posteriori fashion.Because multithreaded computations with arbitrary dependencies can be impossible toschedule eciently [10], we study subclasses of general multithreaded computations in whichthe kinds of syncrhonizations that can occur are restricted. A strict multithreaded computation is one in which all join edges from a thread go to an ancestor of the thread inthe activation tree. In a strict computation, the only edge into a subtree (emanating fromoutside the subtree) is the spawn edge that spawns the subtree's root thread. For example,the computation of Figure 1 is strict, and the only edge into the subtree rooted at 2 is thespawn edge (v2; v3). Thus, strictness means that a thread cannot be invoked before all ofits arguments are available, although the arguments can be garnered in parallel. A ful lystrict computation is one in which all join edges from a thread go to the thread's parent. Afully strict computation is, in a sense, a \well-structured" computation, in that all join edgesfrom a subtree (of the spawn tree) emanate from the subtree's root. The example compu5 tation of Figure 1 is fully strict. Any multithreaded computation that can be executed in adepth-rst manner on a single processor can be made either strict or fully strict by alteringthe dependency structure, possibly aecting the achievable parallelism, but not aecting thesemantics of the computation [5].We quantify and bound the execution time of a computation on a P -processor parallelcomputer in terms of the computation's \work" and \critical-path length." We dene thework of the computation to be the total number of instructions and the critical-pathlength to be the length of a longest directed path in the dag. Our example computation(Figure 1) has work 23 and critical-path length 10. For a given computation, let T (X ) denotethe time to execute the computation using P -processor execution schedule X , and letTP = minXT (X )denote the minimum execution time with P processors|the minimum being taken over all P -processor execution schedules for the computation. Then T1 is the work of the computation,since a 1-processor computer can only execute one instruction at each step, and T1 is thecritical-path length, since even with arbitrarily many processors, each instruction on a pathmust execute serially. Notice that we must have TP T1=P , because P processors canexecute only P instructions per time step, and of course, we must have TP T1.Early work on dag scheduling by Brent [13] and Graham [27, 28] shows that there exist P -processor execution schedules X with T (X ) T1=P + T1. As the sum of two lower bounds,this upper bound is universally optimal to within a factor of 2. The following theorem,proved in [10, 20], extends these results minimally to show that this upper bound on TP canbe obtained by greedy schedules: those in which at each step of the execution, if at leastP instructions are ready, then P instructions execute, and if fewer than P instructions areready, then all execute.Theorem 1 (The greedy-scheduling theorem) For any multithreaded computation with workT1 and critical-path length T1, and for any number P of processors, any greedy P -processorexecution schedule X achieves T (X ) T1=P + T1.Generally, we are interested in schedules that achieve linear speedup, that is T (X ) =O(T1=P ). For a greedy schedule, linear speedup occurs when the paral lelism, which wedene to be T1=T1, satises T1=T1 = (P ).To quantify the space used by a given execution schedule of a computation, we dene thestack depth of a thread to be the sum of the sizes of the activation frames of all its ancestors,including itself. The stack depth of a multithreaded computation is the maximum stackdepth of any of its threads. We shall denote by S1 the minimum amount of space possible forany 1-processor execution of a multithreaded computation, which is equal to the stack depthof the computation. Let S(X ) denote the space used by a P -processor execution scheduleX of a multithreaded computation. We shall be interested in those execution schedules thatexhibit at most linear expansion of space, that is, S(X ) = O(S1P ), which is existentiallyoptimal to within a constant factor [10].6

3 The busy-leaves propertyOnce a thread has been spawned in a strict computation, a single processor can completethe execution of the entire subcomputation rooted at even if no other progress is madeon other parts of the computation. In other words, from the time the thread is spawneduntil the time dies, there is always at least one thread from the subcomputation rootedat that is ready. In particular, no leaf thread in a strict multithreaded computation canstall. As we shall see, this property allows an execution schedule to keep the leaves \busy."By combining this \busy-leaves" property with the greedy property, we derive executionschedules that simultaneously exhibit linear speedup and linear expansion of space.In this section, we show that for any number P of processors and any strict multithreadedcomputation with work T1, critical-path length T1, and stack depth S1, there exists a P -processor execution schedule X that achieves time T (X ) T1=P +T1 and space S(X ) S1Psimultaneously. We give a simple online P -processor parallel algorithm|the Busy-LeavesAlgorithm|to compute such a schedule. This simple algorithm will form the basis for therandomized work-stealing algorithm presented in Section 4.The Busy-Leaves Algorithm operates online in the following sense. Before the tth step,the algorithm has computed and executed the rst t 1 steps of the execution schedule.At the tth step, the algorithm uses only information from the portion of the computationrevealed so far in the execution to compute and execute the tth step of the schedule. Inparticular, it does not use any information from instructions not yet executed or threads notyet spawned.The Busy-Leaves Algorithm maintains all living threads in a single thread pool whichis uniformly available to all P processors. When spawns occur, new threads are added tothis global pool, and when a processor needs work, it removes a ready thread from the pool.Though we describe the algorithm as a P -processor parallel algorithm, we shall not analyze itas such. Specically, in computing the tth step of the schedule, we allow each processor to addthreads to the thread pool and delete threads from it. Thus, we ignore the eects of processorscontending for access to the pool. In fact, we shall only analyze properties of the scheduleitself and ignore the cost incurred by the algorithm in computing the schedule. (Schedulingoverheads will be analyzed for the randomized work-stealing algorithm, however.)The Busy-Leaves Algorithm operates as follows. The algorithm begins with the rootthread in the global thread pool and all processors idle. At the beginning of each step, eachprocessor either is idle or has a thread to work on. Those processors that are idle begin thestep by attempting to remove any ready thread from the pool. If there are suciently manyready threads in the pool to satisfy all of the idle processors, then every idle processor getsa ready thread to work on. Otherwise, some processors remain idle. Then, each processorthat has a thread to work on executes the next instruction from that thread. In general,once a processor has a thread, call it a, to work on, it executes an instruction from a ateach step until the thread either spawns, stalls, or dies, in which case, it performs accordingto the following rules. ➊ Spawns: If the thread a spawns a child b, then the processor nishes the currentstep by returning a to the thread pool. The processor begins the next step workingon b . 7 processor activitystep thread pool p1 p21 1: v12 v23 2: v3 1: v164 2 3: v4 v175 1 2 v5 6: v186 1 2: v6 v197 1 2 4: v7 v208 2 v8 1: v219 1 2: v910 1 5: v10 2: v1311 1 v11 v1412 2 v12 1: v2213 1 2: v1514 1: v23Figure 2: A 2-processor execution schedule computed by the Busy-Leaves Algorithm for the computation of Figure 1. This schedule lists the living threads in the global thread pool at each stepjust after each idle processor has removed a ready thread. It also lists the ready thread beingworked on and the instruction executed by each of the 2 processors, p1 and p2, at each step. Livingthreads that are ready are listed in bold. The other living threads are stalled. ➋ Stalls: If the thread a stalls, then the processor nishes the current step by returninga to the thread pool. The processor begins the next step idle. ➌ Dies: If the thread a dies, then the processor nishes the current step by checking tosee if a's parent thread b currently has any living children. If b has no live childrenand no other processor is working on b, then the processor takes b from the pooland begins the next step working on b. Otherwise, the processor begins the next stepidle.Figure 2 illustrates these three rules in a 2-processor execution schedule computed bythe Busy-Leaves Algorithm on the computation of Figure 1. Rule ➊: At step 2, processorp1 working on thread 1 executes v2 which spawns the child 2, so p1 places 1 back in thepool (to be picked up at the beginning of the next step by the idle p2) and begins the nextstep working on 2. Rule ➋: At step 8, processor p2 working on thread 1 executes v21 and1 stalls, so p2 returns 1 to the pool and begins the next step idle (and remains idle sincethe thread pool contains no ready threads). Rule ➌: At step 13, processor p1 working on2 executes v15 and 2 dies, so p1 retrieves the parent 1 from the pool and begins the nextstep working on 1.Besides being greedy, for any strict computation, the schedule computed by the BusyLeaves Algorithm maintains the busy-leaves property: at every time step during theexecution, every leaf in the \spawn subtree" has a processor working on it. We dene thespawn subtree at any time step t to be the portion of the spawn tree consisting of just8 those threads that are alive at step t. To restate the busy-leaves property, at every time step,every living thread that has no living descendants has a processor working on it. We shallnow prove this fact and show that it implies linear expansion of space. It is worth notingthat not every multithreaded computation has a schedule that maintains the busy-leavesproperty, but every strict multithreaded computation does. We begin by showing that anyschedule that maintains the busy-leaves property exhibits linear expansion of space.Lemma 2 For any multithreaded computation with stack depth S1, any P -processor executionschedule X that maintains the busy-leaves property uses space bounded by S(X ) S1P .Proof: The busy-leaves property implies that at all time steps t, the spawn subtree has atmost P leaves. For each such leaf, the space used by it and all of its ancestors is at most S1,and therefore, the space in use at any time step t is at most S1P .For schedules that maintain the busy-leaves property, the upper bound S1P is conservative. By charging S1 space for each busy leaf, we may be overcharging. For some computations, by knowing that the schedule preserves the busy-leaves property, we can appealdirectly to the fact that the spawn subtree never has more than P leaves to obtain tightbounds on space usage [6].We nish this section by showing that for strict computations, the Busy-Leaves Algorithmcomputes a schedule that is both greedy and maintains the busy-leaves property.Theorem 3 For any number P of processors and any strict multithreaded computation withwork T1, critical-path length T1, and stack depth S1, the Busy-Leaves Algorithm computesa P -processor execution schedule X whose execution time satises T (X ) T1=P + T1 andwhose space satises S(X ) S1P .Proof: The time bound follows directly from the greedy-scheduling theorem (Theorem 1),since the Busy-Leaves Algorithm computes a greedy schedule. The space bound follows fromLemma 2 if we can show that the Busy-Leaves Algorithm maintains the busy-leaves property.We prove this fact by induction on the number of steps. At the rst step of the algorithm, thespawn subtree contains just the root thread which is a leaf, and some processor is workingon it. We must show that all of the algorithm rules preserve the busy-leaves property. Whena processor has a thread a to work on, it executes instructions from that thread until iteither spawns, stalls, or dies. Rule ➊: If a spawns a child b, then a is not a leaf (even if itwas before) and b is a leaf. In this case, the processor works on b, so the new leaf is busy.Rule ➋: If a stalls, then a cannot be a leaf since in a strict computation, the unresolveddependency must come from a descendant. Rule ➌: If a dies, then its parent thread bmay turn into a leaf. In this case, the processor works on b unless some other processoralready is, so the new leaf is guaranteed to be busy.We now know that every strict multithreaded computation has an ecient executionschedule, and we know how to nd it. But these facts take us only so far. Execution schedulesmust be computed eciently online, and though the Busy-Leaves Algorithm does computeecient execution schedules and does operate online, it surely does not do so eciently,except possibly in the case of small-scale symmetric multiprocessors. This lack of scalabilityis a consequence of employing a single centralized thread pool at which all processors mustcontend for access. In the next section, we present a distributed online scheduling algorithm,and in the following sections, we prove that it is both ecient and scalable.9

4 A randomized work-stealing algorithmIn this section, we present an online, randomized work-stealing algorithm for scheduling multithreaded computations on a parallel computer. Also, we present an important structurallemma which is used at the end of this section to show that for fully strict computations, thisalgorithm causes at most a linear expansion of space. This lemma reappears in Section 6 toshow that for fully strict computations, this algorithm achieves linear speedup and generatesexistentially optimal amounts of communication.In the Work-Stealing Algorithm, the centralized thread pool of the Busy-LeavesAlgorithm is distributed across the processors. Specically, each processor maintains a readydeque data structure of threads. The ready deque has two ends: a top and a bottom.Threads can be inserted on the bottom and removed from either end. A processor treatsits ready deque like a call stack, pushing and popping from the bottom. Threads that aremigrated to other processors are removed from the top.In general, a processor obtains work by removing the thread at the bottom of its readydeque. It starts working on the thread, call it a, and continues executing a's instructionsuntil a spawns, stalls, dies, or enables a stalled thread, in which case, it performs accordingto the following rules. ➊ Spawns: If the thread a spawns a child b, then a is placed on the bottom of theready deque, and the processor commences work on b . ➋ Stalls: If the thread a stalls, its processor checks the ready deque. If the dequecontains any threads, then the processor removes and begins work on the bottommostthread. If the ready deque is empty, however, the processor begins work stealing: itsteals the topmost thread from the ready deque of a randomly chosen processor andbegins work on it. (This work-stealing strategy is elaborated below.) ➌ Dies: If the thread a dies, then the processor follows rule ➋ as in the case of astalling. ➍ Enables: If the thread a enables a stalled thread b, the now-ready thread b isplaced on the bottom of the ready deque of a's processor.A thread can simultaneously enable a stalled thread and stall or die, in which case we rstperform rule ➍ for enabling and then rule ➋ for stalling or rule ➌ for dying. Except forrule ➍ for the case when a thread enables a stalled thread, these rules are analogous to therules of the Busy-Leaves Algorithm, and as we shall see, rule ➍ is needed to ensure that thealgorithm maintains important structural properties, including the busy-leaves property.The Work-Stealing Algorithm begins with all ready deques empty. The root thread ofthe multithreaded computation is placed in the ready deque of one processor, while the otherprocessors start work stealing.When a processor begins work stealing, it operates as follows. The processor becomesa thief and attempts to steal work from a victim processor chosen uniformly at random.The thief queries the ready deque of the victim, and if it is nonempty, the thief removes andbegins work on the top thread. If the victim's ready deque is empty, however, the thief triesagain, picking another victim at random.10

Γk

Γ2

Γ1

Γ0

currently executing thread

ready deque

Figure 3: The structure of a processor's ready deque. The black instruction in each thread indicatesthe thread's currently ready instruction. Only thread k may have been worked on since it lastspawned a child. The dashed edges are the \deque edges" introduced in Section 6.We now state and prove an important lemma on the structure of threads in the readydeque of any processor during the execution of a fully strict computation. This lemma isused later in this section to analyze execution space and in Section 6 to analyze executiontime and communication. Figure 3 illustrates the lemma.Lemma 4 In the execution of any ful ly strict multithreaded computation by the Work-StealingAlgorithm, consider any processor p and any given time step at which p is working on athread. Let 0 be the thread that p is working on, let k be the number of threads in p's readydeque, and let 1; 2; : : : ; k denote the threads in p's ready deque ordered from bottom totop, so that 1 is the bottommost and k is the topmost. If we have k > 0, then the threadsin p's ready deque satisfy the fol lowing properties: ➀ For i = 1; 2; : : : ; k, thread i is the parent of i1. ➁ If we have k > 1, then for i = 1; 2; : : : ; k 1, thread i has not been worked on sinceit spawned i1.Proof: The proof is a straightforward induction on execution time. Execution begins withthe root thread in some processor's ready deque and all other ready deques empty, so thelemma vacuously holds at the outset. Now, consider any step of the algorithm at whichprocessor p executes an instruction from thread 0. Let 1; 2; : : : ; k denote the k threadsin p's ready deque before the step, and suppose that either k = 0 or both properties hold.Let 00 denote the thread (if any) being worked on by p after the step, and let 01; 02; : : : ; 0k0denote the k0threads in p's ready deque after the step. We now look at the rules of thealgorithm and show that they all preserve the lemma. That is, either k0 = 0 or bothproperties hold after the step.Rule ➊: If 0 spawns a child, then p pushes 0 onto the bottom of the ready dequeand commences work on the child. Thus, 00 is the child, we have k0 = k + 1 > 0, andfor j = 1; 2; : : : ; k0, we have 0j = j1. See Figure 4. Now, we can check both properties.Property ➀: If k0 > 1, then for j = 2; 3; : : : ; k0, thread 0jis the parent of 0j1, since beforethe spawn we have k > 0, which means that for i = 1; 2; : : : ; k, thread i is the parent of i1.11

Moreover, 01 is obviously the parent of 00. Property ➁: If k0 > 2, then for j = 2; 3; : : : ; k01,thread 0j has not been worked on since it spawned 0j1, because before the spawn we havek > 1, which means that for i = 1; 2; : : : ; k 1, thread i has not been worked on since itspawned i1. Finally, thread 01 has not been worked on since it spawned 00, because thespawn only just occurred. Γk Γ2 Γ1 Γ0 ➠ Γ′k′ Γ′3 Γ′2 Γ′1 Γ′0(a) Before spawn. (b) After spawn.Figure 4: The ready deque of a processor before and after the thread 0 that it is working onspawns a child. (Note that the threads 0 and 00 are not actually in the deque; they are thethreads being worked on before and after the spawn.)Rules ➋ and ➌: If 0 stalls or dies, then we have two cases to consider. If k = 0, theready deque is empty, so the processor commences work stealing, and when the processorsteals and begins work on a thread, we have k0 = 0. If k > 0, the ready deque is notempty, so the processor pops the bottommost thread o the deque and commences work onit. Thus, we have 00 = 1 (the popped thread) and k0 = k 1, and for j = 1; 2; : : : ; k0, wehave 0j = j+1. See Figure 5. Now, if k0 > 0, we can check both properties. Property ➀:For j = 1; 2; : : : ; k0, thread 0jis the parent of 0j1, since for i = 1; 2; : : : ; k, thread i is theparent of i1. Property ➁: If k0 > 1, then for j = 1; 2; : : : ; k0 1, thread 0j has not beenworked on since it spawned 0j1, because before the stall or death we have k > 2, whichmeans that for i = 2; 3; : : : ; k 1, thread i has not been worked on since it spawned i1. Γk Γ2 Γ1 Γ0

➠

Γ′k′

Γ′1

Γ′0(a) Before death. (b) After death.Figure 5: The ready deque of a processor before and after the thread 0 that it is working on dies.(Note that the threads 0 and 00 are not actually in the deque; they are the threads being workedon before and after the death.)Rule ➍: If 0 enables a stalled thread, then due to the fully strict condition, that previously stalled thread must be 0's parent. First, we observe that we must have k = 0. If12 we have k > 0, then the processor's ready deque is not empty, and this parent thread mustbe bottommost in the ready deque. Thus, this parent thread is ready and Rule ➍ does notapply. With k = 0, the ready deque is empty and the processor places the parent thread onthe bottom of the ready deque. We have 00 = 0 and k0 = k + 1 = 1 with 01 denoting thenewly enabled parent. We only have to check the rst property. Property ➀: Thread 01 isobviously the parent of 00.If some other processor steals a thread from processor p, then we must have k > 0, andafter the steal we have k0 = k 1. If k0 > 0 holds, then both properties are clearly preserved.All other actions by processor p|such as work stealing or executing an instruction that doesnot invoke any of the above rules|clearly preserve the lemma.Before moving on, it is worth pointing out how it may happen that thread k has beenworked on since it spawned k1, since Property ➁ excludes k. This situation arises whenk is stolen from processor p and then stalls on its new processor. Later, k is reenabled byk1 and brought back to processor p's ready deque. The key observation is that when k isreenabled, processor p's ready deque is empty and p is working on k1. The other threadsk2; k3; : : : ; 0 shown in Figure 3 were spawned after k was reenabled.We conclude this section by bounding the space used by the Work-Stealing Algorithmexecuting a fully strict computation.Theorem 5 For any ful ly strict multithreaded computation with stack depth S1, the WorkStealing Algorithm run on a computer with P processors uses at most S1P space.Proof: Like the Busy-Leaves Algorithm, the Work-Stealing Algorithm maintains the busyleaves property: at every time step of the execution, every leaf in the current spawn subtreehas a processor working on it. If we can establish this fact, then Lemma 2 completes theproof.That the Work-Stealing Algorithm maintains the busy-leaves property is a simple consequence of Lemma 4. At every time step, every leaf in the current spawn subtree must beready and therefore must either have a processor working on it or be in the ready dequeof some processor. But Lemma 4 guarantees that no leaf thread sits in a processor's readydeque while the processor works on some other thread.With the space bound in hand, we now turn attention to analyzing the time and communication bounds for the Work-Stealing Algorithm. Before we can proceed with this analysis,however, we must take care to dene a model for coping with the contention that may arisewhen multiple thief processors simultaneously attempt to steal from the same victim.5 Atomic accesses and the recycling gameThis section presents the \atomic-access" model that we use to analyze contention during theexecution of a multithreaded computation by the Work-Stealing Algorithm. We introducea combinatorial \balls and bins" game, which we use to bound the total amount of delayincurred by random, asynchronous accesses in this model. We shall use the results of thissection in Section 6, where we analyze the Work-Stealing Algorithm.The atomic-access model is the machine model we use to analyze the Work-StealingAlgorithm. We assume that the machine is an asynchronous parallel computer with P13 processors, and its memory can be either distributed or shared. Our analysis assumes thatconcurrent accesses to the same data structure are serially queued by an adversary, as inthe atomic message-passing model of [36]. This assumption is more stringent than that inthe model of Karp and Zhang [33]. They assume that if concurrent steal requests are madeto a deque, in one time step, one request is satised and all the others are denied. In theatomic-access model, we also assume that one request is satised, but the others are queuedby an adversary, rather than being denied. Moreover, from the collection of waiting requestsfor a given deque, the adversary gets to choose which is serviced and which continue to wait.The only constraint on the adversary is that if there is at least one request for a deque, thenthe adversary cannot choose that none be serviced.The main result of this section is to show that if requests are made randomly by Pprocessors to P deques with each processor allowed at most one outstanding request, thenthe total amount of time that the processors spend waiting for their requests to be satisedis likely to be proportional to the total number M of requests, no matter which processorsmake the requests and no matter how the requests are distributed over time. In order toprove this result, we introduce a \balls and bins" game that models the eects of queueingby the adversary.The (P; M)-recycling game is a combinatorial game played by the adversary, in whichballs are tossed at random into bins. The parameter P is the number of balls in the game,which is equal to the number of bins. The parameter M is the total number of ball tossesexecuted by the adversary. Initially, all P balls are in a reservoir separate from the P bins.At each step of the game, the adversary executes the following two operations in sequence:1. The adversary chooses some of the balls in the reservoir (possibly all and possiblynone), and then for each of these balls, the adversary removes it from the reservoir,selects one of the P bins uniformly and independently at random, and tosses the ballinto it.2. The adversary inspects each of the P bins in turn, and for each bin that contains atleast one ball, the adversary removes any one of the balls in the bin and returns it tothe reservoir.The adversary is permitted to make a total of M ball tosses. The game ends when M balltosses have been made and all balls have been removed from the bins and placed back in thereservoir.The recycling game models the servicing of steal requests by the Work-Stealing Algorithm. We can view each ball and each bin as being owned by a distinct processor. If a ballis in the reservoir, it means that the ball's owner is not making a steal request. If a ball isin a bin, it means that the ball's owner has made a steal request to the deque of the bin'sowner, but that the request has not yet been satised. When a ball is removed from a binand returned to the reservoir, it means that the request has been serviced.After each step t of the game, there are some number nt of balls left in the bins, whichcorrespond to steal requests that have not been satised. We shall be interested in the totaldelay D =PTt=1 nt , where T is the total number of steps in the game. The goal of theadversary is to make the total delay as large as possible. The next lemma shows that despite14 the choices that the adversary makes about which balls to toss into bins and which to returnto the reservoir, the total delay is unlikely to be large.Lemma 6 For any > 0, with probability at least 1, the total delay in the (P; M)-recyclinggame is O(M + P lg P + P lg(1=)).1The expected total delay is at most M. In other words,the total delay incurred by M random requests made by P processors in the atomic-accessmodel is O(M +P lg P +P lg(1=)) with probability at least 1, and the expected total delayis at most M.Proof: We rst make the observation that the strategy by which the adversary chooses aball from each bin is immaterial, and thus, we can assume that balls are queued in their binsin a rst-in-rst-out (FIFO) order. The adversary removes balls from the front of the queue,and when the adversary tosses a ball, it is placed on the back of the queue. If several ballsare tossed into the same bin at the same step, they can be placed on the back of the queuein any order. The reason that assuming a FIFO discipline for queuing balls in a bin does notaect the total delay is that the number of balls in a given bin at a given step is the sameno matter which ball is removed, and where balls are tossed has nothing to do with whichball is tossed.For any given ball and any given step, the step either nishes with the the ball in a binor in the reservoir. Dene the delay of ball r to be the random variable r denoting thetotal number of steps that nish with ball r in a bin. Then, we haveD = XPr=1r : (1)Dene the ith cycle of a ball to be those steps in which the ball remains in a bin from theith time it is tossed until it is returned to the reservoir. Dene also the ith delay of a ballto be the number of steps in its ith cycle.We shall analyze the total delay by focusing, without loss of generality, on the delay = 1of ball 1. If we let m denote the number of times that ball 1 is tossed by the adversary, andfor i = 1; 2; : : : ; m, let di be the random variable denoting the ith delay of ball 1, then wehave =Pmi=1 di.We say that the ith cycle of ball 1 is delayed by another ball r if the ith toss of ball 1places it in some bin k and ball r is removed from bin k during the ith cycle of ball 1. Sincethe adversary follows the FIFO rule, it follows that the ith cycle of ball 1 can be delayedby another ball r either once or not at all. Consequently, we can decompose each randomvariable di into a sum di = xi2 + xi3 + + xim of indicator random variables, wherexir =(1 if the ith cycle of ball 1 is delayed by ball r;0 otherwise.Thus, we have = Xmi=1XPr=2xir : (2)1Greg Plaxton of the University of Texas, Austin has improved this bound to O(M) for the case when1= is at most polynomial in M and P [40]. 15

We now prove an important property of these indicator random variables. Consider anyset S of pairs (i; r), each of which corresponds to the event that the ith cycle of ball 1 isdelayed by ball r. For any such set S, we claim thatPr8<:^(i;r)2S(xir = 1)9=; P jSj: (3)The crux of proving the claim is to show thatPr8<:xir = 1^(i0;r0)2S0(xi0r0 = 1)9=; 1=P ; (4)where S0 = S f(i; r)g, whence the claim (3) follows from Bayes's Theorem.We can derive Inequality (4) from a careful analysis of dependencies. Because the adversary follows the FIFO rule, we have that xir = 1 only if, when the adversary executes the ithtoss of ball 1, it falls into whatever bin contains ball r, if any. A priori, this event happenswith probability either 1=P or 0, and hence, with probability at most 1=P . Conditioning onany collection of events relating which balls delay this or other cycles of ball 1 cannot increase this probability, as we now argue in two cases. In the rst case, the indicator randomvariables xi0r0 , where i06= i, tell whether other cycles of ball 1 are delayed. This informationtells nothing about where the ith toss of ball 1 goes. Therefore, these random variables areindependent of xir , and thus, the probability 1=P upper bound is not aected. In the secondcase, the indicator random variables xir0 tell whether the ith toss of ball 1 goes to the bincontaining ball r0, but this information tells us nothing about whether it goes to the bincontaining ball r, because the indicator random variables tell us nothing to relate where ballr and ball r0are located. Moreover, no \collusion" among the indicator random variablesprovides any more information, and thus Inequality (4) holds.Equation (2) shows that the delay encountered by ball 1 throughout all of its cyclescan be expresses as a sum of m(P 1) indicator random variables. In order for to equalor exceed a given value , there must be some set containing of these indicator randomvariables, each of which must be 1. For any specic such set, Inequality (3) says that theprobability is at most P that all random variables in the set are 1. Since there arem(P 1) (emP=)such sets, where e is the base of the natural logarithm, we havePr f g emPP =em =P ;whenever max f2em; lg P + lg(1=)g.Although our analysis was performed for ball 1, it applies to any other ball as well.Consequently, for any given ball r which is tossed mr times, the probability that its delay rexceeds max f2emr ; lg P + lg(1=)g is at most =P . By Boole's inequality and Equation (1),16 it follows that with probability at least 1 , the total delay D is at mostD XPr=1max f2emr ; lg P + lg(1=)g= (M + P lg P + P lg(1=)) ;since M =PPr=1 mr .The upper bound E [D] M can be obtained as follows. Recall that each r is thesum of (P 1)mr indicator random variables, each of which has expectation at most 1=P .Therefore, by linearity of expectation, E [r ] mr . Using Equation (1) and again usinglinearity of expectation, we obtain E [D] M.With this bound on the total delay incurred by M random requests now in hand, weturn back to the Work-Stealing Algorithm.6 Analysis of the work-stealing algorithmIn this section, we analyze the time and communication cost of executing a fully strict multithreaded computation with the Work-Stealing Algorithm. For any fully strict computationwith work T1 and critical-path length T1, we show that the expected running time withP processors, including scheduling overhead, is T1=P + O(T1). Moreover, for any > 0,the execution time on P processors is T1=P + O(T1 + lg P + lg(1=)), with probability atleast 1 . We also show that the expected total communication during the execution of afully strict computation is O(P T1(1 + nd)Smax), where nd is the maximum number of joinedges from a thread to its parent and Smax is the largest size of any activation frame.Unlike in the Busy-Leaves Algorithm, the \ready pool" in the Work-Stealing Algorithmis distributed, and so there is no contention at a centralized data structure. Nevertheless, itis still possible for contention to arise when several thieves happen to descend on the samevictim simultaneously. In this case, as we have indicated in the previous section, we makethe conservative assumption that an adversary serially queues the work-stealing requests.We further assume that it takes unit time for a processor to respond to a work-stealingrequest. This assumption can be relaxed without materially aecting the results so that awork-stealing response takes any constant amount of time.To analyze the running time of the Work-Stealing Algorithm executing a fully strictmultithreaded computation with work T1 and critical-path length T1 on a computer withP processors, we use an accounting argument. At each step of the algorithm, we collect Pdollars, one from each processor. At each step, each processor places its dollar in one ofthree buckets according to its actions at that step. If the processor executes an instructionat the step, then it places its dollar into the Work bucket. If the processor initiates a stealattempt at the step, then it places its dollar into the Steal bucket. And, if the processormerely waits for a queued steal request at the step, then it places its dollar into the Waitbucket. We shall derive the running-time bound by bounding the number of dollars in eachbucket at the end of the execution, summing these three bounds, and then dividing by P .We rst bound the total number of dollars in the Work bucket.17

Lemma 7 The execution of a ful ly strict multithreaded computation with work T1 by theWork-Stealing Algorithm on a computer with P processors terminates with exactly T1 dol larsin the Work bucket.Proof: A processor places a dollar in the Work bucket only when it executes an instruction.Thus, since there are T1 instructions in the computation, the execution ends with exactly T1dollars in the Work bucket.Bounding the total dollars in the Steal bucket requires a signicantly more involved\delay-sequence" argument. We rst introduce the notion of a \round" of work-steal attempts, and we must also dene an augmented dag that we then use to dene \critical"instructions. The idea is as follows. If, during the course of the execution, a large number ofsteals are attempted, then we can identify a sequence of instructions|the delay sequence|inthe augmented dag such that each of these steal attempts was initiated while some instruction from the sequence was critical. We then show that a critical instruction is unlikely toremain critical across a modest number of steal attempts. We can then conclude that sucha delay sequence is unlikely to occur, and therefore, an execution is unlikely to suer a largenumber of steal attempts.A round of steal attempts is a set of at least 3P but fewer than 4P consecutive stealattempts such that if a steal attempt that is initiated at time step t occurs in a particularround, then all other steal attempts initiated at time step t are also in the same round. Wecan partition all of the steal attempts that occur during an execution into rounds as follows.The rst round contains all steal attempts initiated at time steps 1; 2; : : : ; t1, where t1 is theearliest time such that at least 3P steal attempts were initiated at or before t1. We say thatthe rst round starts at time step 1 and ends at time step t1. In general, if the ith roundends at time step ti, then the (i + 1)st round begins at time step ti + 1 and ends at theearliest time step ti+1 > ti + 1 such that at least 3P steal attempts were initiated at timesteps between ti + 1 and ti+1, inclusive. These steal attempts belong to round i + 1. Bydenition, each round contains at least 3P consecutive steal attempts. Moreover, since atmost P 1 steal attempts can be initiated in a single time step, each round contains fewerthan 4P 1 steal attempts, and each round takes at least 4 steps.The sequence of instructions that make up the delay sequence is dened with respect toan augmented dag obtained by modifying the original dag slightly. Let G denote the originaldag, that is, the dag consisting of the computation's instructions as vertices and its continue,spawn, and join edges as edges. The augmented dag G0is the original dag G together withsome new edges, as follows. For every set of instructions u, v, and w such that (u; v) is aspawn edge and (u; w) is a continue edge, the deque edge (w; v) is placed in G0. Thesedeque edges are shown dashed in Figure 3. In Section 2 we made the technical assumptionthat instruction w has no incoming join edges, and so G0is a dag. If T1 is the length of alongest path in G, then the longest path in G0has length at most 2T1. It is worth pointingout that G0is only an analytical tool. The deque edges have no eect on the scheduling andexecution of the computation by the Work-Stealing Algorithm.The deque edges are the key to dening critical instructions. At any time step duringthe execution, we say that an unexecuted instruction v is critical if every instruction thatprecedes v (either directly or indirectly) in G0has been executed, that is, if for every instruction w such that there is a directed path from w to v in G0, instruction w has been18 executed. A critical instruction must be ready, since G0contains every edge of G, but aready instruction may or may not be critical. Intuitively, the structural properties of a readydeque enumerated in Lemma 4 guarantee that if a thread is deep in a ready deque, thenits current instruction cannot be critical, because the predecessor of the thread's currentinstruction across the deque edge has not yet been executed.We now formalize our denition of a delay sequence.Denition 8 A delay sequence is a 3-tuple (U; R; ) satisfying the fol lowing conditions: U = (u1; u2; : : : ; uL) is a maximal directed path in G0. Specical ly, for i = 1; 2; : : : ; L 1, the edge (ui; ui+1) belongs to G0, instruction u1 has no incoming edges in G0(instruction u1 must be the rst instruction of the root thread), and instruction uL has nooutgoing edges in G0(instruction uL must be the last instruction of the root thread). R is a positive integer number of steal-attempt rounds. = (1; 01; 2; 02; : : : ; L; 0L) is a partition of R (that is R = PLi=1(i + 0i)), suchthat 0i 2 f0; 1g for each i = 1; 2; : : : ; L.The partition induces a partition of a sequence of R rounds as follows. The rst pieceof the partition corresponds to the rst 1 rounds. The second piece corresponds to the next01 consecutive rounds after the rst 1 rounds. The third piece corresponds to the next 2consecutive rounds after the rst (1 + 01) rounds, and so on. We are interested primarilyin the pieces corresponding to the i , not the 0i, and so we dene the ith group of roundsto be the i consecutive rounds starting after the rith round, where ri = Pi1j=1(j + 0j ).Because is a partition of R and 0i 2 f0; 1g, for i = 1; 2; : : : ; L, we haveXLi=1i R L : (5)We say that a given round of steal attempts occurs while instruction v is critical if allof the steal attempts that comprise the round are initiated at time steps when v is critical.In other words, v must be critical throughout the entire round. A delay sequence (U; R; )is said to occur during an execution if for each i = 1; 2; : : : ; L, all i rounds in the ith groupoccur while instruction ui is critical. In other words, ui must be critical throughout all irounds.The following lemma states that if at least R rounds take place during an execution,then some delay sequence (U; R; ) must occur. In particular, if we look at any execution inwhich at least R rounds occur, then we can identify a path U = (u1; u2; : : : ; uL) in the dagG0and a partition = (1; 01; 2; 02; : : : ; L; 0L) of the rst R rounds, such that for eachi = 1; 2; : : : L, all of the i rounds in the ith group occur while ui is critical. Each 0iindicateswhether ui is critical at the beginning of a round but gets executed before the round ends.Such a round cannot be part of any group, because no instruction is critical throughout.Lemma 9 Consider the execution of a ful ly strict multithreaded computation with criticalpath length T1 by the Work-Stealing Algorithm on a computer with P processors. If at least4P R steal attempts occur during the execution, then some delay sequence (U; R; ) mustoccur. 19

Proof: For a given execution in which at least 4P R steal attempts take place, we constructa delay sequence (U; R; ) and show that it occurs. With at least 4P R steal attempts, theremust be at least R rounds. We construct the delay sequence by rst identifying a set ofinstructions on a directed path in G0such that for every time step during the execution,one of these instructions is critical. Then, we partition the rst R rounds according to wheneach round occurs relative to when each instruction on the path is critical.To construct the path U, we work backwards from the last instruction of the root thread,which we denote by v1. Let vl1 denote a (not necessarily immediate) predecessor instructionof v1 in G0with the latest execution time. Let (vl1; : : : ; v2; v1) denote a directed path fromvl1 to v1 in G0. We extend this path back to the rst instruction of the root thread byiterating this construction as follows. At the ith iteration we have an instruction vli and adirected path in G0from vli to v1. We let vli+1 denote a predecessor of vliin G0with thelatest execution time, and let (vli+1 ; : : : ; vli+1; vli ) denote a directed path from vli+1 to vliin G0. We nish iterating the construction when we get to an iteration k in which vlkis therst instruction of the root thread. Our desired sequence is then U = (u1; u2; : : : ; uL), whereL = lk and ui = vLi+1 for i = 1; 2; : : : ; L. One can verify that at every time step of theexecution, one of the vliis critical.Now, to construct the partition = (1; 01; 2; 02; : : : ; L; 0L), we partition the sequenceof the rst R rounds according to when each round occurs. We would like our partition tobe such that for each round (among the rst R rounds), we have the property that if theround occurs while some instruction ui is critical, then the round belongs to the ith group.Start with 1, and let 1 equal the number of rounds that occur while u1 is critical. All ofthese rounds are consecutive at the beginning of the sequence, so these rounds comprise the1st group|that is, they are the 1 consecutive rounds starting after the r1 = 0 rst rounds.Next, if the round that immediately follows those rst 1 rounds begins after u1 has beenexecuted, then we set 01 = 0, and we go on to 2. Otherwise, that round begins while u1 iscritical and ends after u1 is executed (for otherwise, it would be part of the rst group), sowe set 01 = 1, and we go on to 2. For 2, we let 2 equal the number of rounds that occurwhile u2 is critical. Note that all of these rounds are consecutive beginning after the rstr2 = 1 + 01 rounds, so these rounds comprise the 2nd group. We continue in this fashion,letting each i be the number of rounds that occur while ui is critical and letting each 0i bethe number of rounds that begin while ui is critical but do not end until after ui is executed.As an example, we may have a round that begins while ui is critical and then ends whileui+2 is critical, and in this case, we set 0i = 1 and 0i+1 = 0. In this example, the (i + 1)stgroup is empty, so we also set i+1 = 0.We conclude the proof by verifying that the (U; R; ) as just constructed is a delaysequence and that it occurs. By construction, U is a maximal path in G0. Now considering, we observe that each round among the rst R rounds is counted exactly once in eithera i or a 0i, so is indeed a partition of R. Moreover, for i = 1; 2; : : : ; L, at most oneround can begin while the instruction ui is critical and end after ui is executed, so we have0i 2 f0; 1g. Thus, (U; R; ) is a delay sequence. Finally, we observe that, by construction,for i = 1; 2; : : : ; L, the i rounds that comprise the ith group all occur while the instructionui is critical. Therefore, the delay sequence (U; R; ) occurs.We now establish that a critical instruction is unlikely to remain critical across a modestnumber of rounds. Specically, we rst show that a critical instruction must be the ready20 instruction of a thread that is near the top of its processor's ready deque. We then use thisfact to show that after O(1) rounds, a critical instruction is very likely to be executed.Lemma 10 At every time step during the execution of a ful ly strict multithreaded computation by the Work-Stealing Algorithm, each critical instruction is the ready instruction of athread that has at most 1 thread above it in its processor's ready deque.Proof: Consider any time step, and let u0 be the critical instruction of a thread 0. Sinceu0 is critical, 0 is ready. Hence, for some processor p, either 0 is in p's ready deque or 0is being worked on by p. If 0 has more than 1 thread above it in p's ready deque, thenLemma 4 guarantees that each of the at least 2 threads above 0 in p's ready deque is anancestor of 0. Let 1; 2; : : : ; k denote 0's ancestor threads, where 1 is the parent of0 and k is the root thread. Further, for i = 1; 2; : : : ; k, let ui denote the instruction ofthread i that spawned thread i1, and let wi denote ui's successor instruction in thread i.Because of the deque edges, each instruction wi is a predecessor of u0 in G0, and consequently,since u0 is critical, each instruction wi has been executed. Moreover, because each wi is thesuccessor of the spawn instruction ui in thread i, each thread i for i = 1; 2; : : : ; k has beenworked on since the time step at which it spawned thread i1. But Lemma 4 guaranteesthat only the topmost thread in p's ready deque can have this property. Thus, 1 is the onlythread that can possibly be above 0 in p's ready deque.Lemma 11 Consider the execution of any ful ly strict multithreaded computation by theWork-Stealing Algorithm on a paral lel computer with P 2 processors. For any instructionv and any number r 2 of steal-attempt rounds, the probability that any particular set of rrounds occur while the instruction v is critical is at most the probability that only 0 or 1 ofthe steal attempts initiated in the rst r 1 of these rounds choose v's processor, which is atmost e2r+3.Proof: Let ta denote the rst time step at which instruction v is critical, and let p denotethe processor in whose ready deque v's thread resides at time step ta. Consider any particularset of r rounds, and suppose that they all occur while instruction v is critical. Now, considerthe steal attempts that comprise the rst r 1 of these rounds, of which there must be atleast 3P (r 1). Let tb denote the time step just after the time step at which the last ofthese steal attempts is initiated. Note that because the last round, like every round, musttake at least two (in fact, four) steps, the time step tb must occur before the time step atwhich instruction v is executed.We shall rst show that of these 3P (r 1) steal attempts initiated while instruction v iscritical and at least 2 time steps before v is executed, at most 1 of them can choose processorp as its target, for otherwise, v would be executed at or before tb . Recall from Lemma 10that instruction v is the ready instruction of a thread , which has at most 1 thread aboveit in p's ready deque as long as v is critical.If has no threads above it, then another thread cannot be placed above it until afterinstruction v is executed, since only by processor p executing instructions from can anotherthread be placed above it in its ready deque. Consequently, if a steal attempt targetingprocessor p is initiated at some time step t ta, we are guaranteed that instruction v is21 executed at a time step no later than t, either by thread being stolen and executed or byp executing the thread itself.Now, suppose has one thread 0above it in p's ready deque. In this case, if a stealattempt targeting processor p is initiated at time step t ta, then thread 0gets stolenfrom p's ready deque no later than time step t. Suppose further that another steal attempttargeting processor p is initiated at time step t0, where ta t t0 < tb. Then, we know thata second steal will be serviced by p at or before time step t0 + 1. If this second steal getsthread , then instruction v must get executed at or before time step t0 + 1 tb , which isimpossible, since v is executed after time step tb. Consequently, this second steal must getthread 0|the same thread that the rst steal got. But this scenario can only occur if inthe intervening time period, thread 0stalls and is subsequently reenabled by the executionof some instruction from thread , in which case instruction v must be executed before timestep t0 + 1 tb, which is once again impossible.Thus, we must have 3P (r 1) steal attempts, each initiated at a time step t such thatta t < tb , and at most 1 of which targets processor p. The probability that either 0 or 1of 3P (r 1) steal attempts chooses processor p is1 1P3P (r1)+ 3P (r 1) 1P 1 1P3P (r1)1=1 + 3(r 1) PP 1 1 1P3P (r1) (6r 5) 1 1P3P (r1) (6r 5) e3(r1) e2r+3for r 2.We now complete the delay-sequence argument and bound the total dollars in the Stealbucket.Lemma 12 Consider the execution of any ful ly strict multithreaded computation with criticalpath length T1 by the Work-Stealing Algorithm on a paral lel computer with P processors.For any > 0, with probability at least 1, at most O(P (T1 + lg(1=))) work-steal attemptsoccur. The expected number of steal attempts is O(P T1). In other words, with probability atleast 1 , the execution terminates with at most O(P (T1 + lg(1=))) dol lars in the Stealbucket, and the expected number of dol lars in this bucket is O(P T1).Proof: From Lemma 9, we know that if at least 4P R steal attempts occur, then somedelay sequence (U; R; ) must occur. Consider a particular delay sequence (U; R; ) havingU = (u1; u2; : : : ; uL) and = (1; 01; 2; 02; : : : ; L; 0L), with L 2T1. We shall computethe probability that (U; R; ) occurs.Such a sequence occurs if for i = 1; 2; : : : ; L, each instruction ui is critical throughoutall i rounds in the ith group. From Lemma 11, we know that the probability of the irounds in the ith group all occurring while a given instruction ui is critical is at most theprobability that only 0 or 1 of the steal attempts initiated in the rst i 1 of these rounds22 choose v's processor, which is at most e2i+3, provided i 2. (For those values of i withi < 2, we shall use 1 as an upper bound on this probability.) Moreover, since the targetsof the work-steal attempts in the i rounds of the ith group are chosen independently fromthe targets chosen in other rounds, we can bound the probability of the particular delaysequence (U; R; ) occurring as follows:Pr f(U; R; ) occursg=Y1iLPr fthe i rounds of the ith group occur while ui is criticalgY1iLi2e2i+3 exp266420BB@X1iLi2i1CCA+ 3L3775= exp266420BB@X1iLi X1iLi<2i1CCA+ 3L3775 e2((RL)L)+3L= e2R+7L;where the second-to-last line follows from Inequality (5).To bound the probability of some delay sequence (U; R; ) occurring, we need to countthe number of such delay sequences and multiply by the probability that a particular suchsequence occurs. The directed path U in the modied dag G0starts at the rst instructionof the root thread and ends at the last instruction of the root thread. If the original dag hasdegree d, then G0has degree at most d + 1. Consistent with our unit-time assumption forinstructions, we assume that the degree d is a constant. Since the length of a longest path inG0is at most 2T1, there are at most (d+1)2T1 ways of choosing the path U = (u1; u2; : : : ; uL).There are at most 2L+RR 4T1+RRways to choose , since partitions R into 2L pieces.As we have just shown, a given delay sequence has at most an e2R+7L e2R+14T1 chanceof occurring. Multiplying these three factors together bounds the probability that any delaysequence (U; R; ) occurs by(d + 1)2T1 4T1 + RR!e2R+14T1; (6)which is at most for R = cT1 lg d + lg(1=), where c is a suciently large constant.Thus, the probability that at least 4P R = (P (T1 lg d + lg(1=))) = (P (T1 + lg(1=)))steal attempts occur is at most . The expectation bound follows, because the tail of thedistribution decreases exponentially.With bounds on the number of dollars in the Work and Steal buckets, we now state thetheorem that bounds the total execution time for a fully strict multithreaded computationby the Work-Stealing Algorithm, and we complete the proof by bounding the number ofdollars in the Wait bucket. 23

Theorem 13 Consider the execution of any ful ly strict multithreaded computation with workT1 and critical-path length T1 by the Work-Stealing Algorithm on a paral lel computer withP processors. The expected running time, including scheduling overhead, is T1=P + O(T1).Moreover, for any > 0, with probability at least 1 , the execution time on P processorsis T1=P + O(T1 + lg P + lg(1=)).2Proof: Lemmas 7 and 12 bound the dollars in the Work and Steal buckets, so we nowmust bound the dollars in the Wait bucket. This bound is given by Lemma 6 which boundsthe total delay|that is, the total dollars in the Wait bucket|as a function of the numberM of steal attempts|that is, the total dollars in the Steal bucket. This lemma says thatfor any > 0, with probability at least 1 , the number of dollars in the Wait bucket is atmost a constant times the number of dollars in the Steal bucket plus O(P lg P +P lg(1=)),and the expected number of dollars in the Wait bucket is at most the number in the Stealbucket.We now add up the dollars in the three buckets and divide by P to complete this proof.The next theorem bounds the total amount of communication that a multithreaded computation executed by the Work-Stealing Algorithm performs in a distributed model. Theanalysis makes the assumption that at most a constant number of bytes need be communicated along a join edge to resolve the dependency.Theorem 14 Consider the execution of any ful ly strict multithreaded computation with criticalpath length T1 by the Work-Stealing Algorithm on a paral lel computer with P processors.Then, the total number of bytes communicated has expectation O(P T1(1+nd)Smax) where ndis the maximum number of join edges from a thread to its parent and Smax is the size in bytesof the largest activation frame in the computation. Moreover, for any > 0, the probabilityis at least 1 that the total communication incurred is O(P (T1 + lg(1=))(1 + nd)Smax).Proof: We prove the bound for the expectation. The high-probability bound is analogous.By our bucketing argument, the expected number of steal attempts is at most O(P T1).When a thread is stolen, the communication incurred is at most Smax. Communication alsooccurs whenever a join edge enters a parent thread from one of its children and the parenthas been stolen, but since each join edge accounts for at most a constant number of bytes,the communication incurred is at most O(nd) per steal. Finally, we can have communicationwhen a child thread enables its parent and puts the parent into the child's processor's readydeque. This event can happen at most nd times for each time the parent is stolen, so thecommunication incurred is at most ndSmax per steal. Thus, the expected total communicationcost is O(P T1(1 + nd)Smax).The communication bounds in this theorem are existentially tight, in that there existfully strict computations that require (P T1(1 + nd)Smax) total communication for anyexecution schedule that achieves linear speedup. This result follows directly from a theoremof Wu and Kung [47], who showed that divide-and-conquer computations|a special case offully strict computations with nd = 1|require this much communication.2With Plaxton's bound [40] for Lemma 6, this bound becomes T1=P + O(T1), whenever 1= is at mostpolynomial in M and P . 24

In the case when we have nd = O(1) and the algorithm achieves linear expected speedup|that is, when P = O(T1=T1)|the total communication is at most O(T1Smax). Moreover,if P T1=T1, the total communication is much less than T1Smax, which conrms the folkwisdom that work-stealing algorithms require much less communication than the possibly(T1Smax) communication of work-sharing algorithms.7 ConclusionHow practical are the methods analyzed in this paper? We have been actively engaged inbuilding a C-based language called Cilk (pronounced \silk") for programming multithreadedcomputations [5, 8, 25, 32, 42]. Cilk is derived from the PCM \Parallel Continuation Machine" system [29], which was itself partly inspired by the research reported here. The Cilkruntime system employs the Work-Stealing Algorithm described in this paper. Because Cilkemploys a provably ecient scheduling algorithm, Cilk delivers guaranteed performance touser applications. Specically, we have found empirically that the performance of an application written in the Cilk language can be predicted accurately using the model T1=P + T1.The Cilk system currently runs on contemporary shared-memory multiprocessors, suchas the Sun Enterprise, the Silicon Graphics Origin, the Intel Quad Pentium, and the DECAlphaserver. (Earlier versions of Cilk ran on the Thinking Machines CM-5 MPP, the IntelParagon MPP, and the IBM SP-2.) To date, applications written in Cilk include proteinfolding [38], graphic rendering [45], backtrack search, and the ?Socrates chess program [31],which won second prize in the 1995 ICCA World Computer Chess Championship runningon a 1824-node Paragon at Sandia National Laboratories. Our more recent chess program,Cilkchess, won the 1996 Dutch Open Computer Chess Tournament. A team programmingin Cilk won First Prize (undefeated) in the ICFP'98 Programming Contest sponsored by theInternational Conference on Functional Programming.As part of our research, we have implemented a prototype runtime system for Cilk on networks of workstations. This runtime system, called Cilk-NOW [5, 11, 35], supports adaptiveparallelism, where processors in a workstation environment can join a user's computationif they would be otherwise idle and yet be available immediately to leave the computationwhen needed again by their owners. Cilk-NOW also supports transparent fault tolerance,meaning that the user's computation can proceed even in the face of processors crashing,and yet the programmer writes the code in a completely fault-oblivious fashion. A morerecent distributed implementation for clusters of SMP's is described in [42].We have also investigated other topics related to Cilk, including distributed shared memory [6, 7, 24, 26] and debugging tools [17, 18, 22, 45]. Up-to-date information, papers, andsoftware releases can be found on the World Wide Web at http://supertech.lcs.mit.edu/cilk.For the case of shared-memory multiprocessors, we have recently generalized the timebound (but not the space or communication bounds) along two dimensions [1]. First, wehave shown that for arbitrary (not necessarily fully strict or even strict) multithreaded computations, the expected execution time is O(T1=P + T1). This bound is based on a newstructural lemma and an amortized analysis using a potential function. Second, we havedeveloped a nonblocking implementation of the work-stealing algorithm, and we have analyzed its execution time for a multiprogrammed environment in which the computation25 executes on a set of processors that grows and shrinks over time. This growing and shrinking is controlled by an adversary. In case the adversary chooses not to grow or shrink theset of processors, the bound specializes to match our previous bound. The nonblockingwork stealer has been implemented in the Hood user-level threads library [12, 39]. Up-todate information, papers, and software releases can be found on the World Wide Web athttp://www.cs.utexas.edu/users/hood.AcknowledgmentsThanks to Bruce Maggs of Carnegie Mellon, who outlined the strategy in Section 6 for usinga delay-sequence argument to prove the time bounds on the Work-Stealing Algorithm, whichimproved our previous bounds. Thanks to Greg Plaxton of University of Texas, Austin fortechnical comments on our probabilistic analyses. Thanks to the anonymous referees, YanjunZhang of Southern Methodist University, and Warren Burton of Simon Fraser University forcomments that improved the clarity of our paper. Thanks also to Arvind, Michael Halbherr,Chris Joerg, Bradley Kuszmaul, Keith Randall, and Yuli Zhou of MIT for helpful discussions.References[1] Nimar S. Arora, Robert D. Blumofe, and C. Greg Plaxton. Thread scheduling for multiprogrammed multiprocessors. In Proceedings of the Tenth Annual ACM Symposium on Paral lelAlgorithms and Architectures (SPAA), pages 119{129, Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, June 1998.[2] Arvind, Rishiyur S. Nikhil, and Keshav K. Pingali. I-structures: Data structures for parallel computing. ACM Transactions on Programming Languages and Systems, 11(4):598{632,October 1989.[3] Guy E. Blelloch, Phillip B. Gibbons, and Yossi Matias. Provably ecient scheduling forlanguages with ne-grained parallelism. In Proceedings of the Seventh Annual ACM Symposiumon Paral lel Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA), pages 1{12, Santa Barbara, California, July1995.[4] Guy E. Blelloch, Phillip B. Gibbons, Yossi Matias, and Girija J. Narlikar. Space-ecientscheduling of parallelism with synchronization variables. In Proceedings of the 9th AnnualACM Symposium on Paral lel Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA), pages 12{23, Newport,Rhode Island, June 1997.[5] Robert D. Blumofe. Executing Multithreaded Programs Eciently. PhD thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,September 1995. Also available as MIT Laboratory for Computer Science Technical ReportMIT/LCS/TR-677.[6] Robert D. Blumofe, Matteo Frigo, Christopher F. Joerg, Charles E. Leiserson, and Keith H.Randall. An analysis of dag-consistent distributed shared-memory algorithms. In Proceedingsof the Eighth Annual ACM Symposium on Paral lel Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA),pages 297{308, Padua, Italy, June 1996.26 [7] Robert D. Blumofe, Matteo Frigo, Christopher F. Joerg, Charles E. Leiserson, and Keith H.Randall. Dag-consistent distributed shared memory. In Proceedings of the Tenth InternationalParal lel Processing Symposium (IPPS), pages 132{141, Honolulu, Hawaii, April 1996.[8] Robert D. Blumofe, Christopher F. Joerg, Bradley C. Kuszmaul, Charles E. Leiserson, Keith H.Randall, and Yuli Zhou. Cilk: An ecient multithreaded runtime system. Journal of Paral leland Distributed Computing, 37(1):55{69, August 1996.[9] Robert D. Blumofe and Charles E. Leiserson. Scheduling multithreaded computations by workstealing. In Proceedings of the 35th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science(FOCS), pages 356{368, Santa Fe, New Mexico, November 1994.[10] Robert D. Blumofe and Charles E. Leiserson. Space-ecient scheduling of multithreadedcomputations. SIAM Journal on Computing, 27(1):202{229, February 1998.[11] Robert D. Blumofe and Philip A. Lisiecki. Adaptive and reliable parallel computing on networks of workstations. In Proceedings of the USENIX 1997 Annual Technical Conference onUNIX and Advanced Computing Systems, pages 133{147, Anaheim, California, January 1997.[12] Robert D. Blumofe and Dionisios Papadopoulos. The performance of work stealing in multiprogrammed environments. Technical Report TR-98-13, The University of Texas at Austin,Department of Computer Sciences, May 1998.[13] Richard P. Brent. The parallel evaluation of general arithmetic expressions. Journal of theACM, 21(2):201{206, April 1974.[14] F. Warren Burton. Storage management in virtual tree machines. IEEE Transactions onComputers, 37(3):321{328, March 1988.[15] F. Warren Burton. Guaranteeing good memory bounds for parallel programs. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 22(10), October 1996.[16] F. Warren Burton and M. Ronan Sleep. Executing functional programs on a virtual tree ofprocessors. In Proceedings of the 1981 Conference on Functional Programming Languages andComputer Architecture, pages 187{194, Portsmouth, New Hampshire, October 1981.[17] Guang-Ien Cheng. Algorithms for data-race detection in multithreaded programs. Master'sthesis, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Instituteof Technology, May 1998.[18] Guang-Ien Cheng, Mingdong Feng, Charles E. Leiserson, Keith H. Randall, and Andrew F.Stark. Detecting data races in Cilk programs that use locks. In Tenth ACM Symposium onParal lel Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA), Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, June 1998.[19] David E. Culler and Arvind. Resource requirements of dataow programs. In Proceedingsof the 15th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), pages 141{150, Honolulu, Hawaii, May 1988. Also available as MIT Laboratory for Computer Science,Computation Structures Group Memo 280.[20] Derek L. Eager, John Zahorjan, and Edward D. Lazowska. Speedup versus eciency in parallelsystems. IEEE Transactions on Computers, 38(3):408{423, March 1989.27 [21] R. Feldmann, P. Mysliwietz, and B. Monien. Game tree search on a massively parallel system.Advances in Computer Chess 7, pages 203{219, 1993.[22] Mingdong Feng and Charles E. Leiserson. Ecient detection of determinacy races in Cilk programs. In Ninth Annual ACM Symposium on Paral lel Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA),pages 1{11, Newport, Rhode Island, June 1997.[23] Raphael Finkel and Udi Manber. DIB|a distributed implementation of backtracking. ACMTransactions on Programming Languages and Systems, 9(2):235{256, April 1987.[24] Matteo Frigo. The weakest reasonable memory model. Master's thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, January 1998.[25] Matteo Frigo, Charles E. Leiserson, and Keith H. Randall. The implementation of the Cilk-5multithreaded language. In Proceedings of the 1998 ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Programming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI), Montreal, Canada, June 1998.[26] Matteo Frigo and Victor Luchangco. Computation-centric memory models. In Proceedings ofthe Tenth Annual ACM Symposium on Paral lel Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA), pages240{249, Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, June 1998.[27] R. L. Graham. Bounds for certain multiprocessing anomalies. The Bel l System TechnicalJournal, 45:1563{1581, November 1966.[28] R. L. Graham. Bounds on multiprocessing timing anomalies. SIAM Journal on AppliedMathematics, 17(2):416{429, March 1969.[29] Michael Halbherr, Yuli Zhou, and Chris F. Joerg. MIMD-style parallel programming withcontinuation-passing threads. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on MassiveParal lelism: Hardware, Software, and Applications, Capri, Italy, September 1994.[30] Robert H. Halstead, Jr. Implementation of Multilisp: Lisp on a multiprocessor. In ConferenceRecord of the 1984 ACM Symposium on Lisp and Functional Programming, pages 9{17, Austin,Texas, August 1984.[31] Chris Joerg and Bradley C. Kuszmaul. Massively parallel chess. In Proceedings of the ThirdDIMACS Paral lel Implementation Chal lenge, Rutgers University, New Jersey, October 1994.[32] Christopher F. Joerg. The Cilk System for Paral lel Multithreaded Computing. PhD thesis,Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, January 1996.[33] Richard M. Karp and Yanjun Zhang. Randomized parallel algorithms for backtrack searchand branch-and-bound computation. Journal of the ACM, 40(3):765{789, July 1993.[34] Bradley C. Kuszmaul. Synchronized MIMD Computing. PhD thesis, Department of ElectricalEngineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, May 1994. Alsoavailable as MIT Laboratory for Computer Science Technical Report MIT/LCS/TR-645.[35] Philip Lisiecki. Macroscheduling in the Cilk network of workstations environment. Master'sthesis, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Instituteof Technology, May 1996. 28 [36] Pangfeng Liu, William Aiello, and Sandeep Bhatt. An atomic model for message-passing. InProceedings of the Fifth Annual ACM Symposium on Paral lel Algorithms and Architectures(SPAA), pages 154{163, Velen, Germany, June 1993.[37] Eric Mohr, David A. Kranz, and Robert H. Halstead, Jr. Lazy task creation: A technique forincreasing the granularity of parallel programs. IEEE Transactions on Paral lel and DistributedSystems, 2(3):264{280, July 1991.[38] Vijay S. Pande, Christopher F. Joerg, Alexander Yu Grosberg, and Toyoichi Tanaka. Enumerations of the hamiltonian walks on a cubic sublattice. Journal of Physics A, 27, 1994.[39] Dionysios P. Papadopoulos. Hood: A user-level thread library for multiprogramming multiprocessors. Master's thesis, Department of Computer Sciences, The University of Texas atAustin, August 1998.[40] C. Gregory Plaxton, August 1994. Private communication.[41] Abhiram Ranade. How to emulate shared memory. In Proceedings of the 28th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS), pages 185{194, Los Angeles, California,October 1987.[42] Keith H. Randall. Cilk: Ecient Multithreaded Computing. PhD thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, May 1998.[43] Larry Rudolph, Miriam Slivkin-Allalouf, and Eli Upfal. A simple load balancing scheme fortask allocation in parallel machines. In Proceedings of the Third Annual ACM Symposium onParal lel Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA), pages 237{245, Hilton Head, South Carolina,July 1991.[44] Carlos A. Ruggiero and John Sargeant. Control of parallelism in the Manchester dataowmachine. In Functional Programming Languages and Computer Architecture, number 274 inLecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 1{15. Springer-Verlag, 1987.[45] Andrew F. Stark. Debugging multithreaded programs that incorporate user-level locking.Master's thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MassachusettsInstitute of Technology, May 1998.[46] Mark T. Vandevoorde and Eric S. Roberts. WorkCrews: An abstraction for controlling parallelism. International Journal of Paral lel Programming, 17(4):347{366, August 1988.[47] I-Chen Wu and H. T. Kung. Communication complexity for parallel divide-and-conquer. InProceedings of the 32nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS),pages 151{162, San Juan, Puerto Rico, October 1991.[48] Y. Zhang and A. Ortynski. The eciency of randomized parallel backtrack search. In Proceedings of the 6th IEEE Symposium on Paral lel and Distributed Processing, Dallas, Texas,October 1994. 29

