Preparing MPICH for Exascale
Journal Title
XX(X):1–17
©The Author(s) 2016
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/ToBeAssigned
www.sagepub.com/
SAGE
Yanfei Guo1 Ken Raffenetti1 Hui Zhou1 Pavan Balaji2,13 Min Si2,13 Abdelhalim Amer3,13
Shintaro Iwasaki2,13 Sangmin Seo4,13 Giuseppe Congiu5,13 Robert Latham1 Lena Oden6,13
Thomas Gillis5,13 Rohit Zambre5,14 Kaiming Ouyang5,15 Charles Archer7,16 Wesley Bland2,16
Jithin Jose8,16 Sayantan Sur5,16 Hajime Fujita9,16 Dmitry Durnov10 Michael Chuvelev10
Gengbin Zheng10 Alex Brooks10 Sagar Thapaliya10 Taru Doodi5,16 Maria Garazan10 Steve
Oyanagi11 Marc Snir12 and Rajeev Thakur1
Abstract
The advent of exascale supercomputers heralds a new era of scientific discovery, yet it introduces significant
architectural challenges that must be overcome for MPI applications to fully exploit its potential. Among these challenges
is the adoption of heterogeneous architectures, particularly the integration of GPUs to accelerate computation.
Additionally, the complexity of multithreaded programming models has also become a critical factor in achieving
performance at scale. The efficient utilization of hardware acceleration for communication, provided by modern
NICs, is also essential for achieving low latency and high throughput communication in such complex systems. In
response to these challenges, the MPICH library, a high-performance and widely used Message Passing Interface
(MPI) implementation, has undergone significant enhancements. This paper presents four major contributions that
prepare MPICH for the exascale transition. First, we describe a lightweight communication stack that leverages the
advanced features of modern NICs to maximize hardware acceleration. Second, our work showcases a highly scalable
multithreaded communication model that addresses the complexities of concurrent environments. Third, we introduce
GPU-aware communication capabilities that optimize data movement in GPU-integrated systems. Finally, we present
a new datatype engine aimed at accelerating the use of MPI derived datatypes on GPUs. These improvements in the
MPICH library not only address the immediate needs of exascale computing architectures but also set a foundation
for exploiting future innovations in high-performance computing. By embracing these new designs and approaches,
MPICH-derived libraries from HPE Cray and Intel were able to achieve real exascale performance on OLCF Frontier
and ALCF Aurora respectively.
Introduction
The Message Passing Interface (MPI) is the de-facto standard
programming model for scientific applications running on
distributed-memory systems. MPI provides a number of
communication models in order to support the various
communication requirements of high-performance parallel
computing applications. The focus on performance is why
many choose MPI, as they seek to run at the limits of
computational power to enable scientific discovery. As
we enter the exascale era, the continued evolution and
enhancement of MPI are critical for harnessing the vast
capabilities of leadership supercomputing resources.
In order to achieve exascale performance, necessary architectural changes in high-performance computing systems
have brought substantial challenges for systems software.
For MPI to effectively unlock the full power of these systems,
we took a ground up approach to the design of our software.
A key challenge is the popularization of heterogeneity, especially the incorporation of GPU devices for computation.
For GPU applications to scale, MPI must efficiently move
data to and from GPU buffers both within a node and across
many nodes. Another challenge is the increasing adoption
of multithreaded programming models in conjunction with
MPI as noted by Bernholdt et al. (2020). Historically, multithreaded MPI communication performance was lacking, due
1Argonne National Laboratory
2Meta
3Cerebras Systems
4Klaytn Foundation
5NVIDIA
6FernUniversitat in Hagen ¨
7Cornelis Networks
8Microsoft
9Fastly
10Intel Corporation
11Hewlett Packard Enterprise
12University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
13Work done when author was at Argonne National Laboratory
14Work done when author was at University of California, Irvine
15Work done when author was at University of California, Riverside
16Work done when author was at Intel Corporation
Corresponding author:
Yanfei Guo, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL, USA.
Email: yguo@anl.gov
Prepared using sagej.cls [Version: 2017/01/17 v1.20]
2 Journal Title XX(X)
to both a lack of clarity in the MPI standard and unrealized
optimization in implementations. Lastly, to best exploit the
high-performance network in exascale supercomputers, MPI
must take advantage of the available hardware acceleration capabilities offered by the high-performance network.
Minimizing communication latency while simultaneously
maximizing throughput is critical to application scaling and
performance.
This paper presents how we redesigned the MPICH library
with the targeted goal of deploying on exascale systems.
In particular, we address the stated challenges by providing
the following: (1) A lightweight communication abstraction to better match modern low-level network APIs. The
lightweight design enables us to access the higher-level features of the network interface card (NIC) via a low-overhead
communication fast-path; (2) We identified bottlenecks in
the multithreaded MPI communication implementation and
developed novel approaches for optimization without the
need for changes to the MPI standard; (3) We implemented
GPU-awareness in MPICH to support the use of GPU buffers
in communication APIs. (4) In tandem, we created Yaksa, a
new datatype engine aimed at accelerating the use of MPI
derived datatypes on GPUs. In partnership with vendors HPE
Cray and Intel, these new designs were deployed on the first
exascale systems in the world: OLCF Frontier and ALCF
Aurora.
Background and Motivation
In this section, we briefly discuss the technology trends in
exascale computing and how they affect MPI communication.
Accelerated Computing with GPU
Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) have become a cornerstone in the realm of high-performance computing (HPC)
due to their exceptional performance, high throughput, and
energy efficiency. Originally designed to accelerate graphics
rendering, GPUs have evolved to tackle a broad range of
computational tasks, making them invaluable for complex
scientific calculations and data-intensive applications. This
shift toward incorporating GPUs has led to the emergence of
heterogeneous node architectures within computing systems.
Unlike traditional CPUs, GPUs possess their own dedicated
memory, resulting in a bifurcated memory system that adds a
layer of complexity to programming and data management.
The separation of GPU memory from the system’s main
memory introduces specific challenges in the context of
MPI communication. For effective data transfer in such an
environment, the MPI library must be capable of discerning
the location of the data buffer—whether it resides in the
main memory or within the GPU’s memory. Furthermore, it
must navigate the intricacies of moving data efficiently from
the GPU memory to the Network Interface Card (NIC) for
communication purposes. This process may necessitate an
additional data copy step into the main memory, depending
on the system’s architecture and the capabilities of the MPI
implementation. Such operations can potentially impact the
overall performance and efficiency of MPI communication
in systems that leverage GPU acceleration.
To address these challenges and optimize communication
in heterogeneous architectures, advanced features and
capabilities are being integrated into MPI libraries. One
critical aspect is the ability to directly utilize inter-GPU
links, such as NVIDIA’s NVLink, which facilitates faster
data transfer between GPUs, bypassing the need for
data to traverse through the main memory or the CPU.
This capability significantly enhances the efficiency of
data movement and communication in multi-GPU setups,
enabling higher performance levels in computational tasks.
As the use of GPUs in high-performance computing
continues to grow, the evolution of MPI standards
and libraries to fully support heterogeneous architectures
and exploit GPU-specific features becomes increasingly
important. This ongoing development is essential for
maximizing the performance and efficiency of HPC
systems, paving the way for new scientific discoveries and
advancements in various fields.
MPI+Threads
The MPI-everywhere model of parallelism has served applications well for several decades, but scaling applications in
this model is becoming increasingly difficult The biggest
reason for this difficulty in scaling is that not all on-node
resources scale at the same rate. Specifically, the number of
cores available on a node is increasing rapidly. Other on-node
resources such as memory, cache, TLB space, and network
resources, however, scale much more slowly. Since the MPIeverywhere model uses a separate MPI process for each core,
it inadvertently leads to a static split of all on-node resources,
resulting in underutilization and wastage of resources. Consequently, researchers have been increasingly looking at
hybrid MPI+threads programming (e.g., MPI+OpenMP) as
an alternative to the traditional MPI-everywhere model.
The communication performance of MPI+threads, however, is usually bad and unscalable with increased number
of threads, especially when multiple threads are involved
in communication (i.e., using MPI THREAD MULTIPLE).
The reason is that all threads within an MPI process communicate using a single endpoint (a representation of underlying
hardware resource at the NIC), which forces the MPI implementation to use locks on the endpoint for serialization. This
model hurts communication throughput.
Hardware Acceleration of Communication in
NIC
Recent high-performance networks have introduced many
hardware features to accelerate the operations frequently
performed in MPI communication. For example, the MPI
standard uses a combination of source rank, tag, and
communicator id of the incoming message to find the
receive operation that is posted into the receive queue. This
searching process is generally referred to as tag matching.
High-performance interconnects, such as InfiniBand and
Slingshot, provide a hardware tag-matching feature, which
can efficiently perform this operation.
Another important hardware technology is remote direct
memory access (RDMA), where the NIC accesses memory
directly bypassing the CPU. Avoiding extra overhead and
directly invoking the NIC’s RDMA path is critical in
Prepared using sagej.cls
3
achieving high-throughput, low-latency communications.
Additionally, there may be hardware acceleration for
selected collective communications.
Optimized Design for Lightweight
Communication
In order to discuss the communication optimizations
designed for exascale supercomputers, let us first establish
the overall architecture of MPICH. As illustrated in Figure 1,
MPICH comprises multiple layers of abstraction. The uppermost layer, referred to as the “MPI layer,” houses machineagnostic functionality, such as language bindings (C, C++,
Fortran), independent collective algorithms, derived datatype
management, and process group management. Beneath the
MPI layer lies the machine-specific code, known as the
“abstract device” or simply the “device” layer. Due to its
dependence on the underlying hardware, this layer allows
for multiple implementations tailored to different machine
architectures, though some architectures share a common
device. For this work, we developed a new device layer
implementation called ch4 (Raffenetti et al. 2017). This
new device is the successor to the ch3 device, which saw
wide adoption on pre-exascale machines. Beyond the MPI
and device layers, MPICH relies on a collection of internal
and external libraries for functionality such as GPU support
and hardware topology detection, which we describe in more
detail in a later section.
With minimum software overhead as the goal, we
designed ch4 from the ground up. The overall architecture
of ch4 is three layers: the ch4 core, the network modules
(netmods), and the shared memory modules (shmmods).
Notably, the ch4 infrastructure is designed to allow most
MPI-level arguments to flow all the way down to the
netmods and shmmods. In other words, little to no
information is lost from the MPI call that triggered a
data movement operation. This enables each netmod
and shmmod to independently determine the optimal
implementation for the operation. If a network or sharedmemory-specific optimization is not readily available, the
module can simply fall back to the ch4 core’s activemessage-based implementation. To illustrate this, let us look
at the steps involved in an MPI PUT operation.
MPI Layer: MPI PUT is a function provided by the MPI
library. Beginning at the MPI layer, MPI PUT implements
the following: (1) check for errors in function arguments; (2)
lookup the internal MPICH window object that corresponds
to the MPI window handle provided by the user; and (3)
thread-safety checking, which informs whether the threadsafe or thread-unsafe communication path is taken.
CH4 Core: The MPI layer next calls into the device
implementation to perform the MPI PUT operation. The
ch4 core layer first checks for locality, meaning whether
the communication target is a process on the same node, a
different node, or whether it is the same process as the origin.
In the case where the origin and target processes are the
same, ch4 core handles the entire communication. ch4
passes control down to the shmmod when processes are on
the same node, and to the netmod for inter-node transfers.
netmod/shmmod: After control is passed from the ch4
core to the netmod or shmmod, a decision is made
whether the communication is suitable for a direct
implementation, or whether to fall back to the generic
active-message implementation. In the case of MPI PUT,
we wish to take advantage of hardware-supported RDMA
write capabilities in the network. The netmod will check
the operation arguments and decide whether to issue the
communication “natively” via the network API, or to
return control back to the ch4 core generic code. In the
native case, the netmod will translate the communication
arguments as needed for the network API in use (e.g.,
MPI target window offset to remote address) and issue the
necessary network operations prescribed by the semantics of
MPI PUT.
The key point to emphasize in the ch4 design is
minimal software overhead. Communication arguments flow
as directly as possible to the lowest layers of the software
stack, unimpeded by intermediate layers. The semantics of
an operation are never lost, thereby enabling the layer that
eventually performs the communication to use all available
information for optimization.
Next, we will present instruction- and cache-level analysis
of MPICH using the ch4 device. Furthermore, we show
how this analysis led to optimizations to reduce software
overheads in the fast-path.
Instruction-Count Analysis of MPICH
First, we analyze the instructions executed by MPICH
in a “default” ch4 build. That is, a build without the
use of extra compiler flags or configuration options. This
build is representative of what most users would find
on a typical system and includes convenient features for
users and administrators. Notably, the default configuration
includes argument error checking to ensure that, for
instance, datatypes are properly committed before use in
communication, and that the source or destination rank for
a message is valid. In our experiments we used a static
MPICH library, though both shared and static libraries are
supported. To obtain an accurate instruction count, we used
the Intel Software Development Emulator (SDE) (Intel 2024)
to capture the instructions for executing the target MPI
functions. We added the SSC MARK marker at the beginning
and end of MPI ISEND and MPI PUT, which enables Intel
SDE to record all the instructions being executed in those
two functions. The experiment analyzes instruction count in
MPICH v3.2, which was the first version when ch4 was
released.
MPICH v3.2 takes 221 instructions for MPI ISEND and
215 instructions for MPI PUT in this configuration. We
counted the instructions from the start of the MPI function
call, down to the network communication layer, and back
to the application. The intent is to show the number of
instructions added by MPI to an application in lieu of
bypassing MPI and directly coding the low-level network
communication in the application itself. In short, it is the
cost of the MPI abstraction. We analyze only MPI ISEND
because the software path for MPI IRECV is similar.
The default MPICH ch4 build already shows significant
improvement over its predecessor in ch3. For example, an
MPICH ch3 build (also referred to as MPICH/Original),
takes 253 instructions for MPI ISEND and 1,342 instructions for MPI PUT. ch4 offers a 13% and 84% reduction
Prepared using sagej.cls
4 Journal Title XX(X)
OneAPI HWLOC JSON-C
Abstract Device Interface (ADI)
MPI Interface
Application
GPU IPC
Yaksa
Datatype
Engine
MPL
(Portable
Funtionalities)
Machine-independent 
Collectives Derived Datatype Management Group Management
C/Fortran Bindings
CH4
Netmods
libfabric UCX
Architecture-specific 
Collectives
Active Message
Fallback
GPU Support
Fallback VCI StreamSupport
Shmmod
POSIX XPMEM GPU IPC
CUDA HIP
Figure 1. Overview of the MPICH software stack.
in instructions for these calls, which can be attributed to
the communication fast-path design in ch4. The reduction
in instruction count here is because the fast-path in ch4
bypassed the software emulation for MPI communication
protocols. This is most notable in MPI PUT.
This improvement is promising, but we also wish to
understand the purpose of the remaining instructions. To do
so, we carefully mapped the instructions to the code path for
MPI ISEND and MPI PUT, the results of which are shown
in Table 1. The instruction counts are obtained by analyzing
the recorded instructions and attributing them back to their
corresponding functionality in the MPICH source code.
Table 1. Instruction counts for MPI calls
Reason MPI ISEND MPI PUT
Error checking 74 72
Thread-safety check 6 14
MPI function call 23 25
Redundant runtime checks 59 62
MPI mandatory overheads 59 44
Some of the overheads noted in Table 1 can be reduced
trivially. Error checking can catch user errors, such as
incorrect function arguments and invalid buffer addresses.
While a useful feature, error checking is not mandated by
the MPI standard and offers little value to applications that
have verified correct MPI usage. One way to reduce errorchecking overhead would be to provide two MPI library
builds—with and without error checking enabled—so that
users can choose.
Similarly, thread-safety checks in MPICH are sometimes
unnecessary. MPICH defaults to supporting thread safety at
build time, which users can enable via MPI INIT THREAD.
Having a single library to support single and multi-threaded
usage is good for reducing complexity in distribution but
adds overhead when thread safety is not needed. Another
optimization possibility is to provide both a thread-safe and
a thread-unsafe library, which users can select at link time.
Function-call overheads from MPI are more difficult
to avoid. In our analysis, each MPI function call takes
16–18 instructions just to load the stack before the
function can execute. Since the compiler must treat the
function as somewhat of a black box, it is challenging
to optimize instructions across function boundaries. The
result is redundant or unnecessary checks are sometimes
performed by MPI. An example is when an application calls
MPI ISEND with MPI DOUBLE in the datatype argument.
In MPICH, MPI DOUBLE is a compile-time constant that
encodes the properties of the datatype directly in the handle
value. MPI, however, cannot assume a built-in datatype
is used in communication and therefore must inspect the
handle and extract the necessary information at run time. The
overheads associated with this can be attributed to the MPI
library relying on functions rather than preprocessor macros.
Inlining Code on the Critical Path
To address the MPI function call overhead, we turn to
link-time optimizations, such as link-time inlining. This
optimization must be deployed with caution, as the total
binary size of the application may increase significantly,
coupled with builds that take extended amounts of time
to complete. Fortunately, most compiler and linker suites
implement advanced link-time inlining features, which can
be selectively targeted at specific files.
We started by inlining certain MPI library functions into
the application. Because we are able to inline specific files,
we can strategically inline performance-critical functions,
such as MPI ISEND and MPI PUT, while others, such as
MPI INIT, remain as regular function calls. This approach
significantly cuts down on the amount of inlined code versus
a more course-grained strategy, resulting in smaller binaries
and acceptable build times.
While simply inlining MPI functions eliminates the
function call overhead in Table 1, it may not be effective
at eliminating redundant runtime checks. In order to look
more closely at the checks performed by MPI related
to datatypes, we surveyed 62 applications for datatype
usage. We examined the NAS parallel benchmarks (NASA
2017), CORAL benchmarks (DOE 2017), DOE codesign
applications (ANL 2017; ExaCT 2017), and other large
applications that consume significant compute cycles at large
supercomputing centers (Valiev et al. 2010; Fischer et al.
Prepared using sagej.cls
5
2008). We found three classes of datatype usage in these
applications.
• Class 1 (derived datatypes): The use of derived
datatypes was observed only in two applications,
HACC (Habib et al. 2013) and MCB (MCB 2013).
Both use such datatypes in the setup phase and not the
performance-critical path.
• Class 2 (direct predefined datatypes): Several applications directly use predefined datatypes, such as
MPI DOUBLE or MPI INT, in the MPI communication call to describe the data layout.
• Class 3 (indirect predefined datatypes): Some applications use predefined datatypes but not directly in
the MPI communication call. Instead, the application
selects an appropriate datatype at runtime and stores
it in a variable that gets passed to MPI at function
invocation.
Due to their widespread use in performance-critical
application code, we target the second and third classes
for further optimization. For direct predefined datatypes,
just inlining MPI function calls is enough to eliminate
unnecessary runtime datatype checks. The compiler is able
to see that the datatype is a constant value and can extract
the information needed to evaluate the conditional statements
later in the code. Conceptually, MPI is able to eliminate code
needed to handle alternate datatypes since it knows only a
single datatype will ever be used at a given call site.
Indirect predefined datatypes are more challenging to
address. Since the compiler may not be able to determine
that the datatype variable is a constant value, inlining the
function call will fail to optimize away the runtime checks.
We observe that applications utilize indirect predefined
datatypes as a way to provide compatible types between
multiple libraries and languages (that is, by creating
a user-defined MPI Datatype and mapping it to one
of the predefined MPI datatypes). In LULESH (Karlin
et al. 2013), the application baseType is mapped to
MPI FLOAT or MPI DOUBLE depending on the floating
point precision in use. Similar to LULESH, an internal
function in Nekbone (nek 2017) uses a switch statement
to select the desired predefined datatype and returns it via
the function’s argument list. In this case, the function call
adds a layer of indirection that makes it more difficult for
the compiler to optimize. QMCPACK (Kim et al. 2018),
LSMS (Sheehan et al. 1998), and miniFE (Lin et al. 2015) are
C++ applications that use function templates to implement
a type mapping that is conceptually similar to the one in
LULESH.
These applications require more aggressive inline settings
to optimize away runtime datatype checking, expanding the
scope to more files and functions than is typically considered.
Modern compilers and linkers allow expanded inline settings
via command-line flags, which we used in our experiments
to enable link-time inlining across all files of the application
as well as statically linked dependencies such as MPI. As we
suspected, those runtime datatype checks do disappear when
the entire application is visible to the optimizer, but the cost
is much larger instruction count as well as binary size for the
application.
Network Address Virtualization with MPI
Communicators
One of the key abstractions of MPI is in how it logically
represents groups of processes with integer ranks within
opaque communication objects. To specify a process to
send data to (or receive data from), a process provides the
communication and rank as arguments to the communication
call. The combination of communicator and rank is
translated by MPI to some low-level address, whether it
be an address in shared memory or a network address
for communicating across nodes. In other words, the
communicator object abstracts the physical communication
layer from the application. MPI allows applications to build
on top of the built-in communicators in MPI, such as
MPI COMM WORLD, to create potentially different mappings
of ranks to physical addresses.
The conversion performed by MPI when communicator
and rank are given as inputs to a function is nontrivial.
The simplest implementation is an array, where each
communicator has a mapping of ranks to addresses it
can lookup via index. We measure this method as taking
two instructions, though one of those is a costly memory
dereference operation. Additionally, keeping the lookup
mechanism simple has the tradeoff of a larger memory
requirement. Each communicator must maintain an O(P)
table of addresses, where P is the number of processes in the
group of the communicator. (Guo et al. 2017) explored more
sophisticated methods for converting communicator and rank
to network address with the goal of minimizing memory
usage. With this came the tradeoff of increased instruction
counts, even for simple rank mappings.
Per-Operation Completion Semantics
MPI point-to-point communication exposes fine-grained
completion semantics to the user. Each nonblocking
communication operation returns a handle to an opaque
request object. These handles must be managed at the
application level and eventually completed (or freed)
explicitly via subsequent calls to the MPI library. These
fine-grained semantics offer maximum flexibility to the user,
sometimes more than is necessary for a given application.
For example, a stencil computation may issue several
operations at a time and cannot move to its next iteration
until all have completed. While stencil computations may not
be the most complex, they are common in several HPC fluid
dynamics and quantum chemistry applications.
For an MPI library to comply with the specification, it
must maintain request objects for each operation that can
be completed individually. In terms of cost, each request
represents additional memory usage and instruction counts.
One way in which MPICH reduces the per-operation cost of
managing request objects is by maintaining a preallocated
global request. For operations that complete immediately,
MPICH will increase the reference count of the already
allocated and completed request and then return its handle
to the user. This avoids the need for request allocation and
initialization. When the global request is passed back to
MPI by way of an MPI WAIT or MPI TEST call, MPICH
observes that the request is complete and decrements the
reference count, but since an internal reference is always
Prepared using sagej.cls
6 Journal Title XX(X)
held, it is not deallocated. We measure the savings of this
design as 10 instructions, including dereference instructions,
over an implementation that allocates a new request even for
immediately complete operations.
Evaluation of Lightweight Communication
Next we present a performance evaluation of MPICH/CH4
compared to MPICH/Original. We use a variety of
benchmarks and applications on multiple hardware and
software platforms to give a comprehensive analysis of our
work. To reiterate, the goal of MPICH/CH4 is to minimize
the overhead in terms of instructions imposed by MPI
on communication. Our target for these optimizations is
latency-sensitive applications—those that are running at the
strong-scaling limit—in order to reduce time to solution as
much as possible using all the available computing power
in the system. Accordingly, we perform our evaluation on
benchmarks and applications along these lines.
Experimental Testbeds
For our experiments, we ran microbenchmarks on the “IT”
and “Gomez” clusters at the Argonne Joint Laboratory
for System Evaluation (JLSE). Each IT cluster node has
two Intel E5-2699 v4 processors with an Intel Omni-Path
interconnect. Gomez nodes have four Intel E7-8867 v3
processors with a Mellanox EDR interconnect. Both IT and
Gomez have dynamic frequency scaling disabled in order to
collect stable and reproducible results.
Microbenchmark Evaluations
In this section we examine the message-issue rate of
MPICH/CH4 compared to MPICH/Original. We look at
MPI ISEND and MPI PUT operations using a benchmark
designed to show the limit of what a single CPU core can
inject into the network. The size of each message measured
by the benchmark is a single byte.
For the first measurement (Figure 2), we used the IT
cluster to evaluate the MPICH/CH4/OFI stack because of
its Intel Omni-Path Architecture interconnect, which has
good support for Libfabric via the PSM2 provider. The
second measurement (Figure 3) is on the Gomez cluster,
which utilizes a Mellanox InfiniBand interconnect. Third
(Figure 4), we simulate an infinitely fast network, one in
which communication takes no time at all. We modified the
MPI library to still perform all the necessary work to issue
a communication, but without actually transmitting the data
over a network.
In each of the three experiments, we compare five different MPICH configurations: (1) baseline MPICH/Original
(legend: “CH3”); (2) default MPICH/CH4 (legend: “CH4
(default)”); (3) MPICH/CH4 with no error checking (legend:
“CH4 (no-err)”); (4) MPICH/CH4 with no error checking
or thread safety (legend: “CH4 (no-err-single)”); and (5)
MPICH/CH4 with no error checking, no thread safety, and
link-time inlining enabled (legend: “CH4 (no-err-singleipo)”). Performance notably improves as the instruction
counts decrease in each step. Figure 2 shows the message
rates of MPI ISEND and MPI PUT on Intel Omni-Path network. The majority of the performance improvement comes
from the communication fast-path built in MPICH/CH4,
0 2M 4M 6M 8M 10M
CH3
CH4 (default)
CH4 (no-err)
CH4 (no-err-single)
CH4 (no-err-single-ipo)
Message Rate (msg/s)
MPI_Put MPI_Isend
Figure 2. Message rates with OFI/PSM2.
0 2M 4M 6M 8M 10M
CH3
CH4 (default)
CH4 (no-err)
CH4 (no-err-single)
CH4 (no-err-single-ipo)
Message Rate (msg/s)
MPI_Put MPI_Isend
Figure 3. Message rates with UCX.
0 20M 40M 60M 80M 100M
CH3
CH4 (default)
CH4 (no-err)
CH4 (no-err-single)
CH4 (no-err-single-ipo)
Message Rate (msg/s)
MPI_Put MPI_Isend
Figure 4. Message rates with infinitely fast network.
as shown by the difference between CH4 (default) and
CH3 in Figure 2. The fast-path improved the message
rate for MPI ISEND and MPI PUT by 77.9% and 334%,
respectively. Similar improvements can be observed on Mellanox InfiniBand network, as shown in Figure 3, where
CH4 (default) improves the message rate for MPI ISEND
and MPI PUT by 250% and 445%, respectively. Note that
the significant improvement in MPI ISEND was partially
because MPICH/CH3 can only use regular verbs transport while MPICH/CH4 with UCX will use the accelerated
verbs transport. The results also show that if we can
further optimize out the extra instructions in Table 1, we can
achieve even higher performance. The most optimized option
(CH4 (no-err-single-ipo)) achieved 98.2% higher message
rate for MPI ISEND and 395.2% higher message rate for
MPI PUT than CH3. Similar improvements can also be
observed on Mellanox InfiniBand network, as shown in Figure 3, where CH4 (no-err-single-ipo) improves the message
rate for MPI ISEND and MPI PUT by 262% and 475%,
respectively.
While the performance improvements are large, the
performance is limited by the networks themselves and the
costs involved with transmitting actual data. This is why the
performance improvement of CH4 (no-err-single-ipo) over
CH4 (default) is limited. As future networks continue to
improve injection rate, we expect our lightweight design
will continue to show benefits and even larger performance
increases. Consider the results of the third experiment in
Figure 4, where on an “infinitely fast” network, the message
rate can be increased by several orders of magnitude if all
these overheads are eliminated.
Using the best-case performance from the experiments
above, we further analyze the performance potential by
Prepared using sagej.cls
7
0 40M 80M
MPICH/CH4
Network Addr Virtualization
Per-op Completion
All Together
Message Rate (msg/s)
Figure 5. MPI standard improvements for MPI ISEND on
infinitely fast network.
also combining the proposed improvements in rank-tonetwork-address translation and request-object initialization.
Still using the “infinitely fast” network that completes all
communication immediately, the performance is shown in
Figure 5. Both changes offer another large improvement
in MPI performance, eventually topping out at 87 million
messages per second from a single CPU core. We only show
the performance with MPI ISEND here because the message
rate of MPI PUT is already bounded by the CPU before these
optimizations (as shown in Figure 4).
Efficient Multithreaded MPI Communication
As modern HPC systems embrace increasingly hybrid
hardware architectures, on-node runtimes, such as OpenMP,
are gaining widespread traction. Consequently, the hybrid
methodology of leveraging both OpenMP and MPI, often
dubbed as MPI+Threads, has assumed greater significance.
Nevertheless, MPI+Threads applications historically suffer
from dismal MPI communication performance, especially
in scenarios involving latency-sensitive small message
communications, attributed to thread contention. This is
shown by the orange curve in Figure 6.
Modern network interface cards (NICs) can support
multiple hardware communication contexts, thus allowing
for independent, parallel communication streams from a
single node. In the MPI-everywhere model, where multiple
MPI processes are launched on a single node with each
process running under MPI THREAD SINGLE, each MPI
process uses an independent communication context. Thus,
the MPI-everywhere model is able to show good scalable
parallel communication performance, as shown by the green
curve in Figure 6. However, attaining similar communication
performance in MPI+Threads poses challenges. This is
because the thread contexts are invisible to MPI, preventing
an effective separation of communication streams.
To address the performance issue in MPI+Threads, we
designed a new approach, called virtual communication
interface (VCI) (Zambre et al. 2020), to optimize the
utilization of parallel communication streams and align
them with the thread execution context. Figure 6 shows the
improved message rate performance obtained with VCI via
various API semantics. It demonstrates good scalability in
performance, albeit slightly underperforming compared to
the MPI-everywhere model due to the necessary locking
overhead to ensure thread safety.
We describe the design and implementation details of VCI
in the following subsections.
Virtual Communication Interfaces (VCIs)
A virtual communication interface (VCI) provides an
abstract representation of a communication stream. Each
Figure 6. Message-rate scalability of 8-byte MPI Isend. The
orange curve shows the message rate between two nodes in an
MPI+Threads configuration without enabling multiple VCI. The
green curve shows the message rate between two nodes in an
MPI-Everywhere configuration where the number of cores
represents the number of MPI processes under
MPI THREAD SINGLE. The rest of the curves show the
message rate in MPI+threads configuration where multiple VCIs
are enabled. Various strategies of mapping thread contexts to
VCIs are used according to the legend labels.
VCI is backed by a communication context on the
network hardware. This context includes an independent
set of communication resources and maintains independent
message matching and ordering according to MPI’s
messaging semantics. Hence, with multiple VCIs, we obtain
parallel communication streams in the MPI library. The
realization of a VCI depends on the actual communication
devices. In MPICH, a device refers to a lower-level
communication back end. For Mellanox InfiniBand, a
VCI is realized by a UCP worker in the UCX netmod
(UCF-Consortium (2024)). The UCP worker contains verbs
resources, which include a queue pair (QP) for transmission,
a shared receive queue for reception, and a completion queue
for progress. The QP maps to the micro UARs (hardware
registers) on the Mellanox adapter (Mellanox reference
manual, NVIDIA (2016)). For interconnects supported by
the libfabric library (OFI-Working-Group (2024)), such as
the HPE’s Slingshot interconnect (HPE (2024)), a VCI is
realized in the OFI netmod as a libfabric endpoint. An
endpoint maps to a hardware context on the network adapter.
Finally, with on-node shared-memory communications, a
VCI is realized as a dedicated shared-memory mailbox and a
corresponding message queue.
VCI mapping Because VCIs are supported by hardware
contexts, they are a finite resource. For example, Intel
OPA features only 160 hardware contexts on the HFI
adapter (OPA User Guide, Intel (2020)). This is typically
sufficient to support the number of threads on a single node.
However, users are allowed to launch multiple processes
on a single node, and the total number of threads is
allowed to oversubscribe the available cores and may exceed
the maximum number of VCIs the network hardware can
support. Thus, MPICH only allocates a single VCI per
process by default. Multiple VCIs can be allocated if users
set a runtime control variable to inform the library of how
many VCIs the application will need per MPI process.
With a finite number of VCIs available in an MPI
process, it requires an algorithm to map MPI operations
to individual VCIs. An ideal mapping is to achieve a
one-to-one perfect pairing from hardware threads to VCIs.
Prepared using sagej.cls
8 Journal Title XX(X)
However, this is challenging because the thread contexts are
invisible to an MPI library. There are no MPI semantics
to associate with a thread context. An MPI library has
to resort to alternative methods. One strategy is to assign
separate VCIs to different communicators. A communicator
in MPI guarantees a separate messaging context, which
ensures correctness if communications concurrently occur
in separate network streams. However, communicators
are often not good surrogates for hardware threads.
Communicators are typically used for logical architectural
separation rather than for execution context separation. A
mapping from communicators to VCIs may result in a single
thread using multiple VCIs or multiple threads sharing a
VCI. The former case results in a waste of VCI resources,
while the latter results in thread contention and performance
degradation.
Before MPI 4.0, using communicators was the
only method for applications to reliably separate
communication context. MPI-4.0 introduces new
info hints (e.g., mpi assert no any tag and
mpi assert no any source) that would provide
the users with more opportunities to express communication
parallelism in their applications. For example, if an
application hints that it does not use wildcards in its
communication, MPI-4 would allow the user to expose
communication parallelism through tags within a single
communicator. There are also proposals to introduce new
MPI objects that allow users to directly associate the
thread execution context with them, thus providing a more
straightforward method for users to control the usage of
VCIs. In one proposal, the MPI Endpoints proposal by Dinan
et al. (2014), MPI endpoints are introduced to represent
MPI communication contexts. This allows applications to
use different MPI endpoints in different threads explicitly.
A prototype implementation of this proposal is available in
MPICH’s GitHub repository. In another proposal, MPIX
Stream (Zhou et al. (2022)), MPIX stream objects are
introduced to represent execution contexts including threads.
MPIX Stream is available as an MPI extension in recent
MPICH releases.
Informed application developers have several options to
optimize VCI utilization and achieve good MPI+Threads
performance as shown in Figure 6. While both the endpoint
and the MPIX stream proposals offer direct mechanisms for
users to manage VCIs, they are not standardized yet. Using
communicators or info hints to express communication
parallelism is within the current MPI standard, but they only
indirectly affect VCI usage and hence the performance may
be unpredictable.
Connection establishment. Each VCI has its own transportlevel address that needs to be exchanged between the ranks
to establish connections. We do so during the initialization of
MPI. We first use PMI (Balaji et al. (2010)) to exchange the
addresses of a single root VCI on every rank. Using the root
VCI, we exchange the addresses of the rest of the VCIs using
an allgather operation. As expected, establishing connections
statically during initialization incurs an overhead that grows
with the number of VCIs. Similarly, the finalization time
increases since the tear-down time of VCIs is proportional
to the number of VCIs.
It is in our plan to support mechanisms to establish
connections on demand. In addition to initialization time,
the on-demand connection will also address the issue of
overzealously taking hardware resources at initialization
time.
Optimizing multi-VCI communication
Simply using multiple VCIs produces practically no
performance benefit unless the implementation also employs
key optimizations that We discuss in this section. Missing
any of these key optimizations may result in performance
bottlenecks due to serialization between the communication
streams and severely impact the parallel performance.
Per-VCI progress. Prior to the introduction of multiple
VCIs, the progress function only needed to poll progress
on a single VCI. However, when multiple VCIs are in
use, a na¨ıve but correct implementation would require
the progress function to poll progress on all VCIs. This
approach would be detrimental to performance, particularly
in scenarios where multiple threads are concurrently
advancing operations. This is due to contention over the
locks associated with each VCI, resulting in unnecessary
serialization between threads in addition to the redundancy
in progress polling.
Given that all MPI communication operations are tied to a
specific VCI, a progress call primarily needs to poll progress
on the VCI on which the operation was posted. To enable
per-VCI progress, we store the VCI used for an operation in
its request object. Using the information stored in the request
object, the progress function only polls progress on the VCIs
that were used for the operations. If only a single request is
involved in a progress call or when all the requests belong to
a single VCI, the progress function only polls progress on a
single VCI. When multiple threads exclusively use different
VCIs, each per-VCI progress does not contend.
Although per-VCI progress helps improve performance,
progressing only the VCI used by the current request is
potentially incorrect and can lead to deadlock.
Consider the point-to-point example in Figure 7. This is a
correct MPI program—the first synchronous send* on rank
0 (line 3) should return because its matching receive has
already been posted (line 9). With single VCI MPI libraries,
this program completes because MPI Wait(req2) (line
17) initiates the reception of MPI Ssend(comm1) by
polling the single VCI that both communicators map
to, thus allowing MPI Ssend(comm1) to return. With
multiple VCIs and per-VCI progress, MPI Wait(req2)
progresses only the VCI associated with comm2, preventing
MPI Ssend(comm1) to complete and causing deadlock.
In summary, the pure per-VCI progress model can improve
performance, but the global progress model is necessary to
ensure correctness even though it loses some performance.
To account for such communication patterns, we use a hybrid
progress model; that is, we perform one round of global
progress after a certain number of unsuccessful per-VCI
progress attempts to complete an operation.
Per-VCI request management. Even when operations from
multiple threads map to different VCIs, they contend on the
∗conceptually similar to an MPI Send following the rendezvous protocol.
Prepared using sagej.cls
9
1 /*Point-to-point example*/
2 Rank 0:
3 MPI_Ssend(comm1);
4 MPI_Ssend(comm2);
5
6
7
8 Rank 1 / Thread 0:
9 MPI_Irecv(comm1,req1);
10 #pragma omp barrier
11 #pragma omp barrier
12 MPI_Wait(req1);
13
14 Rank 1 / Thread 1:
15 MPI_Irecv(comm2,req2);
16 #pragma omp barrier
17 MPI_Wait(req2);
18 #pragma omp barrier
Figure 7. Example that would deadlock without shared
progress of VCIs.
request-class’s lock when they need to acquire a request
(e.g., during an MPI Isend) or release it (e.g., during
an MPI Wait). This contention creates a performance
serialization effect when multiple threads are concurrently
creating and releasing requests even though the operations
are on different VCIs. To address this contention, we
maintain separate request pools for each VCI. Access to each
request pool is protected by a per-VCI lock. In MPICH,
requests are represented using a 32-bit integer handle with a
fixed bitmask to encode handle types and its internal memory
slab index and block index. To implement a request pool,
some bits are needed to encode the request pool index, which
reduces the number of bits for the object index and thus
reduces the maximum number of request objects that can
be allocated per request pool. Currently, MPICH supports
a maximum of 262,144 active request objects per VCI.
This maximum can be adjusted by shifting the handle bits
allocation or simply increasing the handle type to a 64-bit
integer.
Cache-line awareness for VCIs. We implement the VCI
pool as an array of structs. Each VCI struct holds the lock
for that VCI. Locks of consecutive VCIs are likely to lie on
the same cache line, resulting in the effects of false sharing
when threads map to different VCIs. Hence, we use compiler
attributes to cache-align each VCI. In case the cache-line
alignment is misconfigured at build time and results in false
sharing, the concurrent messaging rate will drop due to the
serialization effect from false sharing.
Microbenchmark analysis
We first measure the aggregate message rate of MPI Isend
and MPI Put (passive target synchronization) using
a communication-intensive benchmark. The benchmark
demonstrates the maximum rate at which multiple cores can
inject messages into the network simultaneously. Each core
on the host node targets a distinct core on the remote node.
We compare the following modes of execution.
• MPI everywhere parallelism using the original
MPICH version that uses one VCI.
• MPI+threads (ser comm+orig mpich)—parallelism
with the user not exposing communication parallelism
on the original MPICH that uses one VCI and the
Global critical section.
• MPI+threads (ser comm+vcis)—same as above but
using the optimized multi-VCI based MPICH/CH4.
• MPI+threads (par comm+orig mpich)—parallelism
with user-exposed parallelism on the original MPICH.
• MPI+threads (par comm+vcis)—same as above but
using the optimized multi-VCI based MPICH/CH4.
• MPI+threads (Endpoints)—parallelism with uservisible endpoints on top of the optimized multi-VCI
infrastructure where each endpoint is a VCI.
We expect MPI everywhere to achieve the best
performance. When the user exposes parallelism and
the implementation enables multiple VCIs, and the user
threads perfectly match the VCIs, we expect it to perform
similarly well but may underperform MPI everywhere
due to the overhead of locking. User-visible endpoints
enable explicit control over VCIs, allowing users to
specify the endpoint to use on the host and the remote
endpoint to target. The communication performance of uservisible endpoints reflects the upper bound of the MPI-4
implementation wherein users implicitly use VCIs through
MPI-4 mechanisms. To match the performance of MPI
everywhere, it requires binding semantics, e.g. the MPIX
stream proposal from Zhou et al. (2022).
For our analysis with MPI+threads, we spawn one rank
per node with an OpenMP thread per core. MPI everywhere
uses a rank per core. In our microbenchmarks with uservisible endpoints, each host-target thread pair uses its
own endpoint, thus exposing communication parallelism
to the MPI library. With MPI-4, when users do not
expose parallelism (ser comm), all threads use the same
communicator or window. In user-exposed parallelism
(par comm), each thread pair uses its own communicator or
window.
Well-behaved communication
For the different modes of execution on OFI/OPA and
UCX/IB, Figure 8 shows the message-rate scalability of a
small-message MPI Isend, and Figure 9 shows the message rate of MPI Isend with 16 cores across varying message sizes. MPI everywhere achieves the highest throughput
in all cases. When users expose communication parallelism,
they achieve the same performance irrespective of the use
of VCIs (par comm) or user-visible endpoints. When users
expose no communication parallelism (ser comm), there is
no performance gain with increasing number of threads.
Thread safety costs. A corresponding MPI everywhere
configuration represents the practical upper bound of
the communication performance of an MPI+threads
configuration. Our optimized MPI+threads library utilizes
the same level of network parallelism as MPI everywhere.
However, MPI+threads incurs thread safety overheads over
MPI everywhere even in the uncontended case. These
overheads are most visible for small messages (see Figure 9)
since the message rate is bound by the CPU, not by the
network. The sources of the thread safety overheads are
lock acquisitions and atomics for completion or reference
counting. Figure 10 shows that if we disable locking and
Prepared using sagej.cls
10 Journal Title XX(X)
0
20
40
60
1 2 4 8 16
Number of cores
Messages/s (x10^6)
Isend; MPICH/OFI/OPA
0
20
40
60
80
1 2 4 8 16
Number of cores
Messages/s (x10^6)
Isend; MPICH/UCX/IB
MPI
Everywhere
+Threads (ser_comm+orig_mpich)
+Threads (par_comm+orig_mpich)
+Threads (par_comm+vcis)
+Threads (ser_comm+vcis)
+Threads (Endpoints)
Figure 8. Message-rate scalability of 8-byte MPI Isend.
0
20
40
60
14
1664
256
10244096
1638465536
Message size (B)
Messages/s (x10^6)
Isend; 16 cores; MPICH/OFI/OPA
0
20
40
60
80
14
1664
256
10244096
1638465536
Message size (B)
Messages/s (x10^6)
Isend; 16 cores; MPICH/UCX/IB
MPI
Everywhere
+Threads (ser_comm+orig_mpich)
+Threads (par_comm+orig_mpich)
+Threads (par_comm+vcis)
+Threads (ser_comm+vcis)
+Threads (Endpoints)
Figure 9. MPI Isend throughput with varying message sizes.
MPI+Threads
(+no atomics)
MPI+Threads
(+no locks)
MPI+Threads
MPI Everywhere
0 25 50 75
Messages/s (x10^6)
Isend; MPICH/UCX/IB
Note: Error bars overlap
Figure 10. MPI+threads costs.
atomics,† MPI+threads can match the throughput of MPI
everywhere. One solution to mitigate thread-safety costs
would be to allow users to provide hints as to which
communicators will be accessed by a dedicated thread,
thereby allowing the MPI library to disable locking for the
VCIs of communicators accessed by dedicated threads.
Not-so-well-behaved communication
Similar to Figures 8 and 9, Figures 11 and 12 demonstrate,
for the different modes of execution on OFI/OPA and
UCX/IB, the throughput scalability of a small-message
MPI Put, and the 16-core message rate of MPI Put across
varying message sizes, respectively
Network hardware limitations. The MPI+threads
message rate of MPI Put on OFI/OPA is dismal even with
exposed parallelism on VCIs and user-visible endpoints.
The reason is that Intel OPA emulates its RMA operations
in software, requiring the application on the target side to
actively progress a VCI for a performance-oriented execution
of the operation. When the application provides no help,
OPA relies on its low-frequency PSM2 progress thread for
completion of the operation. In our benchmark, all the
threads from all processes first initiate their RMA operations
in parallel. Then, one thread waits on an MPI barrier, after 0
10
20
30
40
1 2 4 8 16
Number of cores
Messages/s (x10^6)
Put; MPICH/OFI/OPA
0
25
50
75
100
1 2 4 8 16
Number of cores
Messages/s (x10^6)
Put; MPICH/UCX/IB
MPI
Everywhere
+Threads (ser_comm+orig_mpich)
+Threads (par_comm+orig_mpich)
+Threads (par_comm+vcis)
+Threads (ser_comm+vcis)
+Threads (Endpoints)
Figure 11. Message-rate scalability of 8-byte MPI Put.
0
10
20
30
40
14
1664
256
10244096
1638465536
Message size (B)
Messages/s (x10^6)
Put; 16 cores; MPICH/OFI/OPA
0
25
50
75
100
14
1664
256
10244096
1638465536
Message size (B)
Messages/s (x10^6)
Put; 16 cores; MPICH/UCX/IB
MPI
Everywhere
+Threads (ser_comm+orig_mpich)
+Threads (par_comm+orig_mpich)
+Threads (par_comm+vcis)
+Threads (ser_comm+vcis)
+Threads (Endpoints)
Figure 12. MPI Put throughput with varying message sizes.
0
10
20
30
40
1 2 4 8 16
Number of cores
Messages/s (x10^6)
MPI
Everywhere
+Threads (ser_comm+orig_mpich)
+Threads (par_comm+orig_mpich)
+Threads (par_comm+vcis)
+Threads (ser_comm+vcis)
+Threads (Endpoints)
Put; MPICH/OFI/OPA
Figure 13. Parallel Win free.
which all threads synchronize with a thread barrier. The
communicator used for the MPI barrier internally uses a VCI
different from those of the windows on which the RMA
operations are issued. Thus, none of the threads directly
make progress on the incoming messages of the RMA
VCIs. The thread waiting on the MPI barrier occasionally
performs global progress, so the benchmark eventually
completes, but such global progress is infrequent and thus
hurts performance.
With UCX/IB, on the other hand, we see no such
degradation in performance because Mellanox IB is capable
of implementing contiguous MPI Put operations fully in
hardware. Thus, even if the target threads are not making
direct progress on the RMA VCIs, the operations still
complete quickly.
With MPI everywhere, each process has a single VCI.
Thus, the target ranks waiting on an MPI barrier continuously
progress the VCI being targeted by the initiator ranks.
The main point demonstrated here is the tradeoff between
dedicated progress and shared progress. MPI everywhere
has no distinction between dedicated and shared progress
†Since each thread maps to its own VCI in the MPI+threads
microbenchmark, disabling thread safety, although incorrect, does not lead
to erroneous behavior.
Prepared using sagej.cls
11
0
10
20
0 1 10 100 1000
Target-side computation loop (x10^6)
Messages/s (x10^6)
16 cores; Put; MPICH/OFI/OPA
Figure 14. Busy target.
0
20
40
0 1 2 4 8 16
Number of serialized communicators
Messages/s (x10^6)
16 cores; 16 VCIs; Isend; MPICH/OFI/OPA
Figure 15. Mapping mismatch
because it only has a single VCI. For MPI+threads, when
a single VCI is used (i.e., original MPICH), like MPI
everywhere, it has no distinction between dedicated and
shared progress either. But, for MPI+threads, when we
use multiple VCIs, the same independence of VCIs that
enables good performance through the avoidance of locks
also hurts shared progress between the threads. One can work
around this issue by, for example, having each thread be
responsible for progress on its window (in the same way
that MPI everywhere works). One possibility is that threads
call MPI Win free on their own windows in parallel (see
Figure 13), thus making progress on the corresponding VCIs,
although how practical this possibility is in real applications
remains to be seen.
Busy target. Typically, the target side is involved in its
own computational activities and does not just wait for
communication to complete, as in Figure 13. The target’s
computation then determines the productivity of operations
that need the target VCI to be progressed. Figure 14 shows a
deteriorating MPI Put message rate when the computation
before the call to MPI Win free increases on the threads
of the target rank.
Mismatch in expected mapping to VCI. Even if the
user exposes parallelism, parallel operations can contend
on the same VCI because the number of VCIs available
is hardware dependent and typically small, and these VCIs
themselves are not exposed to the user. A simple first-come,
first-served model of VCI allocation to communicators might
not be the best strategy in this regard because the user cannot
identify which communicators map to distinct VCIs and can
therefore be used by different threads for better performance.
Figure 15 shows the deteriorating effect on throughput for
increasing amounts of serialization when there are 16 threads
and the network hardware features only 16 contexts. The user
is exposing communication parallelism, but the observed
performance is low because of the mismatch in expectations
of mapping to the underlying VCIs. One solution to this
mismatch in expected mapping would be to allow users
to provide hints as to which communicators are used by
different threads and can benefit from independent VCIs.
User-visible endpoints, compared to MPI-4, can perform
better in this situation because they expose the network
hardware contexts to the user. We note that user-visible
endpoints could also be implemented as a virtual layer on
top of internal VCIs. However, they form a closer mapping
to network resources than what communicators do.
Limiting MPI semantics
Abstracting the use of VCIs through communicators can hurt
certain irregular communication patterns. Figure 16 captures
the communication pattern of Legion’s runtime (Bauer et al.
2012), which maintains a set of threads where a few
Figure 16. Dedicated threads.
0
1
2
3
1 2 4 8 16
Number of sender threads
Messages/s (x10^6)
Using
Endpoints
Communicators
Isend; MPICH/OFI/OPA
Figure 17. Performance
are dominant message senders and a few are dedicated
polling threads that receive messages. With MPI-4, each
sender thread uses a separate communicator. However, the
semantics of MPI require the receiver thread to iterate over
the communicators, thus forcing the receiver to contend
on the VCIs of the senders and hurting performance (see
Figure 17). With user-visible endpoints, this contention does
not exist since each thread uses a distinct endpoint and
can directly address the endpoint of the remote receiver.
The single receiver is a bottleneck with both user-visible
endpoints and communicators. With communicators, the
fraction of time spent by the receiver on a VCI’s lock
decreases with increasing number of senders. Hence, its
performance approaches that with endpoints.
Communication with GPU Buffers
The support of GPU buffers in MPI communication requires
the MPI library to be able to handle different routes for
data movement between GPUs and CPUs both within and
across compute nodes. There are three challenges in building
such an MPI library. First, the MPI library needs to interface
with different programming models used by GPUs. For
example, Intel GPUs use the SYCL programming model
and the OneAPI library, which is significantly different
from the CUDA API of NVIDIA GPUs. Second, the
MPI library needs to support both internode and intranode
communication using GPU buffers. Third, the MPI library
needs to support GPU buffers with MPI derived datatypes.
High-performance networks, such as InfiniBand, rely on
device-registered buffers to achieve the best communication
performance in internode communication. Depending on
the message size, the MPI implementation usually needs
to copy the message to a pre-registered bounce buffer or
register the user buffer with the network interface card
(NIC). Because GPU memory is separate from the host
memory, communication using a GPU buffer may require
an additional copy from GPU memory to host memory
before the data can take the traditional route to network.
Modern GPUs can avoid the extra copy between CPU
and GPU with unified virtual addressing and direct GPUNIC communication capabilities such as GPUDirect RDMA.
MVAPICH-GDR (Potluri et al. 2013) is one of the earliest
works to support GPU communication in MPI. It supports
Mellanox InfiniBand for GPUDirect RDMA for NVIDIA
and AMD GPUs. Other more recent studies have further
improved the GPU support in MPI implementations with
a focus on collective communication, datatypes, and GPU
IPC (Chu et al. 2016; Suresh et al. 2022; Hashmi et al.
2020). Most of these optimizations need to be built on top
of a GPU-aware MPI library. In this paper, we focused
on the communication and datatype handling in a portable
Prepared using sagej.cls
12 Journal Title XX(X)
GPU-aware MPI library. As part of ECP, the Open MPI
team developed the LinkX transport to provide GPU support
for both internode and intranode communication (Bernholdt
et al. 2024). Open MPI also relies on Libfabric to provide
an accelerated communication path on the HPE Slingshot 11
network.
With its lightweight design, MPICH can already leverage
hardware support for GPU communication through the use
of Libfabric and UCX. This design reduces the complexity
of supporting internode communication with contiguous,
and some types of noncontiguous, GPU buffers. MPICH
only needs to do three things to fully support GPU
communication:
1. Interfacing with GPU programming models.
2. Supporting internode communication with GPU when
hardware feature is not usable (i.e., fallback path).
3. Supporting intranode communication with GPU.
Portable GPU Programming Interface
We identified three categories of GPU programming capabilities required by MPICH and implemented abstraction
functions in the MPL module. First, MPICH needs a device
management capability. This allows MPICH to correctly
query and initialize the GPU devices for communication.
This is generally encapsulated in a single MPL gpu init
function. MPICH needs basic information such as number
of GPU devices and the connectivity between GPUs if interGPU links are present.
Second, MPICH needs memory management capability.
The majority of functions in the MPL layer are for memory
management (as shown in Table 2). One of the widely used
functions is MPL gpu query pointer attr, which
checks whether a buffer address resides in CPU or
GPU memory. MPICH queries for this buffer attribute
to determine the correct communication path to be used.
MPICH also relies on the memory allocation functions to
manage temporary buffers for GPUs. We use two types
of buffers: GPU buffers for packing and unpacking of
noncontiguous user buffers on GPU, and GPU-registered
host buffers for fallback communication path and shared
memory transport. MPICH also encapsulates the GPU IPC
related functions that are required for shared memory
communication, which we discuss in a subsection below.
Lastly, MPICH also needs data movement functions
to support communication. However, we chose not to
encapsulate most of them in the MPL layer. Instead, we built
a separate datatype engine named Yaksa for handling all data
movement including contiguous and noncontiguous buffers.
MPI Fallback Communication with GPUs
The MPICH fallback communication path is provided by the
Active Message (AM) module. The AM module implements
all MPI functionalities, which enables MPI communication
with simple network capabilities—only basic send and
receive operations are required for AM to work. This is one
way for MPICH to support MPI communication on regular
network stacks such as TCP/IP. For high-performance
networks, the AM module is used only for operations that
are not natively supported by the hardware, for example,
complex noncontiguous datatypes and non-hardware RMA
operations.
We enable the GPU support in the AM module by using
communication buffers allocated as GPU-registered host
memory in AM. On the sender side, MPICH only needs to
copy the data from the user buffer on GPUs to the temporary
buffer used by AM before sending the data. Similarly, on the
receiver side, MPICH will receive the incoming data into the
preallocated temporary buffer and then copy it to the user
buffer on GPUs. Note that it is also possible to use non-GPUregistered host buffer as the AM temporary buffer, but it may
incur additional overhead when copying data because the
GPU driver may use an internal GPU-registered temporary
buffer. It will result in two memory copy steps: one from the
host buffer to the GPU-registered host buffer, then the from
GPU-registered host buffer to the GPU buffer. In this way, all
MPI communication can support GPU buffers without any
requirement for GPU-NIC direct communication support.
We designed an optimization that uses temporary buffers
on GPUs. The necessity of this optimization is due to
the limited performance of communication with temporary
buffers in the host memory. Copying from GPU buffers,
especially non-contiguous GPU buffers, to host buffers is
significantly slower than copying them to GPU buffers.
Exascale supercomputers have GPUs and NICs that support
direct GPU-NIC communication. If the communication
needs to fallback to AM because the user buffer is noncontiguous, it takes a significant performance hit because
of the temporary buffer in the host memory. Therefore,
introducing an alternative route that enables packing and
unpacking data with a GPU temporary buffer improves the
performance.
Another design choice in GPU fallback communication
is that we use preallocated, fixed-size temporary buffers
instead of allocating temporary buffers on demand. This
allows us to keep the buffer allocation overhead out of
the performance-critical path. In MPICH, we set the buffer
to be 16 KB, which is sufficient for eager transmission.
This design, however, does mean that large messages will
have to be broken down intro smaller chunks that are sent
separately. In MPICH, we implemented the communication
protocol in a pipelined fashion where the data copying to
the temporary buffer overlaps with sending of the buffer.
Comparing to the on-demand allocation of big temporary
buffers for large messages, it avoids the allocation overhead
(by using preallocated buffers) and reduces the copying
overhead (by overlapping).
One caveat of using the preallocated GPU-registered
buffers is related to GPU memory usage. The GPU device
needs to maintain the mapping information of the GPUregistered host buffers. In practice, this memory overhead
can be non-negligible (≈300 MB on NVIDIA GPUs). To
avoid wasting resources, we defer the allocation of these
buffers until they are needed for the first time in the MPI
application.
Intranode MPI Communication with GPU IPC
MPICH’s shared memory transport provides send and
receive capabilities through a shared memory region between
processes on the same node. It uses the AM module to
achieve the full MPI capability. With the GPU support in the
Prepared using sagej.cls
13
Table 2. MPL functions of memory management and IPC for GPU.
MPL CUDA HIP ZE
MPL gpu query pointer attr cudaGetPointerAttributes hipGetPointerAttributes zeMemGetAllocProperties
MPL gpu malloc cudaMalloc hipMalloc zeMemAllocDevice
MPL gpu free cudaFree hipFree zeMemFree
MPL gpu malloc host cudaMallocHost hipMalloc zeMemAllocHost
MPL gpu free host cudaFreeHost hipFree zeMemFree
MPL gpu register host cudaHostRegister hipHostUnregister zexDriverImportExternalPointer
MPL gpu unregister host cudaHostUnregister hipHostUnregister zexDriverReleaseImportedPointer
MPL gpu ipc handle create cudaIpcGetMemHandle hipIpcGetMemHandle zeMemGetIpcHandle
MPL gpu ipc handle destroy N/A N/A ioctl
MPL gpu ipc handle map cudaIpcOpenMemHandle hipIpcOpenMemHandle zeMemOpenIpcHandle
MPL gpu ipc handle unmap cudaIpcCloseMemHandle hipIpcCloseMemHandle zeMemCloseIpcHandle
AM module, intranode communication in MPICH is already
GPU-aware. GPU Inter-Process Communication (IPC) is a
mechanism that allows the sharing of GPU resources. The
GPU in one process can access the memory buffer of the
GPU in another process without the need of copying data to
the host memory. This can be particularly useful in intranode
MPI communication as it can improve the communication
performance by avoiding the memory copy to the temporary
buffer in the host memory. More importantly, it enables the
intranode communication to utilize the fast inter-GPU links
when possible.
Figure 18 shows the GPU IPC communication in MPICH.
The sender process first creates an IPC handle for the user
buffer using MPL gpu ipc handle create. Then, this
handle and the MPI communication metadata is sent to the
receiver in a header message. Upon receiving this header,
the receiver will try matching it with a posted receive. The
receiver takes the IPC handle and maps the source buffer
with MPL gpu ipc handle map. This creates a memory
pointer for the source buffer in the receiver’s address space.
Then, the receiver controls the GPU to copy the data from
the mapped address of the source buffer into the receive
buffer. Lastly, the receiver unmaps the IPC handle, sends a
completion message to the sender, and completes the receive
operation. The sender will close the IPC handle (not required
for all GPUs) and complete the send operation. During this
process, the transmission of user buffer is done through
GPU IPC, and the control messages (header and completion
messages) are done through the shared memory.
The receiving process can map the IPC handle to any GPU
that is usable to the process. This mapping choice determines
which GPU compute engine will be used in the data copying.
The GPU IPC in MPICH offers two general protocols for
the buffer copying: a read protocol and a write protocol, as
shown in Figure 19. In this example, the sender process and
the receiver process use GPU 0 and GPU 1, respectively.
In the read protocol, the receiver maps the IPC handle to
the GPU where the receive buffer resides (GPU 1). In this
case, the memory copy from the mapped buffer to the receive
buffer will be performed by the copy engine in GPU 1; i.e.,
the receiver GPU reads from the sender GPU. In the write
protocol, the receiver maps the IPC handle to the sender’s
GPU (GPU 0). The memory copy from the mapped buffer
to the receive buffer will need to be performed by sender’s
GPU, although it is logically equivalent to the copy in the
read protocol. Generally, MPICH prefers the write protocol
Create IPC
Handle
Header
Match w/
RECV
Completion
Notification
Map IPC 
Handle
Copy Data
SEND
Completion
RECV
Completion
Unmap IPC
Handle
Figure 18. GPU IPC
Communication Protocol.
WRITE Protocol
Receiver Address Space
DEST
Buffer
Mapped Buf
w/ GPU 1
IPC 
Handle
GPU 0 GPU 1
Receiver Address Space
DEST
Buffer
Mapped Buf
w/ GPU 0
Copy 
Engine
IPC 
Handle
READ Protocol
SRC 
Buffer
Copy 
Engine
GPU 0
SRC 
Buffer
GPU 1
memcpy
memcpy
Figure 19. Inter-GPU Buffer Copy
Protocols.
for GPU IPC because it offers higher bandwidth than the
read protocol. MPICH needs both protocols because the
write protocol can only work if the receiver process can
control the sender’s GPU, which may not be possible in
practice.
MPICH also supports noncontiguous buffers in GPU IPC.
This is done by flattening‡the MPI derived datatype of the
source buffer and including it in the header. The receiver
will unflatten the received datatype and use it in the buffer
copying. This step is needed because the MPI datatype of
the source buffer may not be present on the receiver. MPICH
sends the datatype only if its flattened version can fit in the
header. The flattened datatype size increases only with the
complexity of the datatype; the header space is sufficient for
most regular MPI derived datatype patterns in applications.
In the rare case of the flattened datatype being too big,
MPICH will fallback to use packing and unpacking for
noncontiguous GPU buffers.
Performance
We measured the point-to-point communication unidirection bandwidth using the OSU microbenchmarks. We
used the ALCF Polaris supercomputer, where each node
contains four NVIDIA A100 GPUs, each with 40 GB
memory. Four NVLink connections are bonded together
‡Flattening is the serialization of data structures describing the MPI derived
datatype.
Prepared using sagej.cls
14 Journal Title XX(X)
 0
 20
 40
 60
 80
 100
14
1664
256
1K4K
16K64K
256K
1M4M
16M64M
256M
1G
Bandwidth (GB/s)
Message Size (B)
Figure 20. Intranode
Point-to-point Bandwidth with
GPU.
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
 25
14
1664
256
1K4K
16K64K
256K
1M4M
Bandwidth (GB/s)
Message Size (B)
Figure 21. Internode
Point-to-point Bandwidth with
GPU.
between each pair of GPUs, providing 100 GB/s bandwidth.
The compute nodes are connected with a 200 Gb/s HPE
Slingshot 11 network. We measured the performance with
contiguous buffers in order to demonstrate the maximum
performance for MPICH’s GPU support. Figures 20 and 21
show the communication bandwidth with MPI ISEND
and MPI IRECV using GPU buffers. For intranode
communication, MPICH’s GPU-IPC transport achieved a
maximum of 83.4 GB/s. For internode communication,
MPICH used HPE’s Libfabric library to support RDMA with
GPU buffers, which allows us to saturate the Slignshot 11
NIC and achieved 23.5 GB/s maximum bandwidth. Because
MPICH is able to saturate the network, the communication
performance with non-contiguous data or complex data
would be determined by how fast the datatype engine is able
to perform packing and unpacking of the data. In the next
section, we focus on the new datatype engine in MPICH.
GPU-efficient Datatype Engine
The MPI datatype abstraction provides a powerful method
to describe data with diverse memory layouts, facilitating
the composition of clear and concise code for data
movement. For example, stencil applications often need
to exchange boundary data that is noncontiguous in
memory. The strided noncontiguous pattern that represents
the surface data of a Cartesian block can be easily
described using an MPI vector datatype. The data exchange
for this noncontiguous data can be expressed the same
way as exchanging contiguous data using MPI Send and
MPI Recv. This approach is superior to manually iterating
the data movement over individual segments. Furthermore,
the MPI datatype abstraction does not preclude optimizations
inside implementations. Common optimization strategies
employed by implementations include packing data into
contiguous regions to compress communication latency or
segmenting data into chunks and orchestrating pipelined
communication to enhance bandwidth.
It is important for an MPI implementation to have a
high-performance datatype engine. Implementations must
consistently outperform or match the efficiency of na¨ıve
manual processing code across a wide range of scenarios.
Failure to do so may lead application programmers to bypass
MPI datatypes entirely, opting instead for manual coding
approaches. However, this presents a significant challenge
due to two primary factors. First, MPI datatypes can be
arbitrarily nested. Unlike straightforward manual loops for
strided data, a general datatype engine introduces additional
branches at each level to accommodate all potential data
structures. Second, a datatype engine must also facilitate
partial packing and unpacking of arbitrary data sections.
Crafting code capable of random access to arbitrarily nested
data structures is inherently complex, often obstructing
straightforward optimization efforts.
The datatype engine used in earlier versions of MPICH is
referred to as “dataloop” (Ross et al. 2003). The dataloop
framework internally represents a datatype as a stack of
structures with each layer of structure termed a dataloop.
The term refers to a data iteration loop. All MPI datatypes
are classified into five types of dataloops: contig, vector,
block-indexed, indexed, and struct. At the center of the
dataloop design is a “loop manipulation” function, which
invokes action-specific functions to process leaf dataloops.
Consequently, the dataloop design effectively segregates
the representation of datatypes, segment iteration, and data
actions. Experiments have shown that the dataloop datatype
engine can rival the performance of manual processing in the
majority of cases (Ross et al. 2003).
However, the dataloop code is exceedingly intricate.
Both the loop representation layer and loop manipulation
layer must contend with general cases as well as specific
optimizations. Furthermore, adapting the dataloop design
to GPUs, where data transfer latency is substantial, proves
challenging. The fallback path of transferring the GPU
data to host staging memory to perform datatype packing
and unpacking introduces significant additional latency.
Implementing the leaf actions in GPU kernels also presents
challenges. The segregation of loop manipulation and leaf
action means that performance is largely impacted by the
repeated latency in launching leaf actions, rather than the
efficiency of the leaf action itself. To overcome these
drawbacks and meet the demands of modern GPU-centric
architectures, we designed a new datatype engine, called
Yaksa. Yaksa is guided by the following design principles.
1. Performance: Yaksa aims to achieve performance
levels that either meet or surpass those achieved by
optimized manual code.
2. Abstractions: Yaksa’s interface abstractions are
designed to be device agnostic. Implementations must
support all memory types, including host memory and
accelerator device memory such as CUDA, ROCm,
and Level Zero.
3. Interface: Yaksa features a standalone interface,
enabling its utilization by non-MPI middleware, such
as UCX, to facilitate support for MPI-like datatypes.
To realize these objectives, Yaksa employs a three-layer
architecture consisting of a frontend layer, a glue layer,
and a backend device layer, as illustrated in Figure 22.
The frontend layer remains agnostic to the underlying
memory subsystem. Functions that operate independently
of specific memory subsystems, such as datatype-to-IOV
conversion and flattening/unflattening of datatypes, are
entirely implemented within the frontend. For operations
requiring knowledge of the actual memory subsystem, such
as packing and unpacking, the frontend transforms irregular
inputs into a collection of smaller regular inputs for the
backend to handle. The glue layer interacts with the backend
devices, queries buffer attributes, prepares staging buffers if
necessary, and orchestrates pipelined data transfer. It also
handles interactions that require multiple backend devices.
The backend device layer is responsible for executing the
Prepared using sagej.cls
15
Yaksa Datatype Engine
Vector
Indexed
Struct
…
Datatype
Frontend
CPU
Backend
CUDA
Backend
HIP
Backend
ZE
Backend
CPU
NVIDIA
GPU
AMD
GPU
Intel
GPU
Figure 22. Design of Yaksa datatype engine.
 0
 5
 10
 15
Packing Bandwidth 
user dataloop yaksa
(GB/s)
contig vector of vectors
Figure 23. Comparison of datatype packing bandwidth for CPU
buffers. Data evaluated on a dual-socket nodes with 2x Intel
Xeon Max 9470C CPUs. Both the contig case and the vector of
vectors case transfer 128 MB of data in total. The time is
measured in milliseconds.
actual packing and unpacking operations, tailored to each
specific memory subsystem.
To ensure optimal performance, Yaksa generates packing
and unpacking kernel functions during compile time for all
datatypes up to a configurable number of nesting levels, with
the default set to three. For shallow datatypes, like a vector of
vectors of doubles, a single kernel function suffices for both
packing and unpacking. These kernel functions typically
consist of straightforward nested loops, with the innermost
loop typically comprising an assignment or memcpy
operation. Consequently, most optimizing compilers can
easily vectorize these kernel functions, thereby matching
the performance of manually optimized code. For datatypes
nested beyond the predetermined levels, Yaksa recursively
iterates through the outer layers until reaching the inner
layers, which can then be handled by calling kernel functions
directly. Given the optimization of the inner loops, the
overall performance is anticipated to approach the optimal
level. The kernel functions can be easily generated as
GPU kernel functions to utilize the many parallel cores
of the GPU device. In addition, the GPU kernel functions
can be launched asynchronously, allowing the data transfer
progress to overlap with other tasks. Separate kernels for
each memory subsystem are independently generated and
optimized at compile time. The frontend selects the backend
at runtime to provide GPU-aware datatype operations. While
Yaksa is capable of querying memory attributes at runtime, it
also offers the option for callers to provide memory attribute
hints directly to Yaksa via info hints. This allows callers
to bypass any additional overhead associated with attribute
querying.
 0
 100
 200
 300
 400
Packing Bandwidth 
CUDA ROCm ZE
(GB/s)
contig vector of vectors
Figure 24. Yaksa datatype packing performance for
GPU-to-GPU buffers over 3 architectures. The contig datatype
is MPI CHAR. The non-contig datatype is two levels of vector
types both with 8 counts of base types followed with 2 counts
gap. The total volume of data in both contig and non-contig
tests are 128 MB. The time is measured in milliseconds.
Figure 23 compares datatype packing performance for
CPU buffers across manual (user) loop code, the former dataloop engine, and the new Yaksa engine. Both the dataloop
and Yaksa engines demonstrate comparable performance for
both contiguous and noncontiguous datatypes versus manual
code. The dataloop even outperforms the manual code for
the vector of vector case. This is possibly due to datatype
optimization by the dataloop engine that simplifies some
nested layers into simpler equivalent structures. We plan to
implement a similar optimization in Yaksa.
Figure 24 shows the performance results of Yaksa over
major GPU architectures. The comparisons across different
GPU architectures are less meaningful due to hardware
differences. For all three architectures, the contiguous case
uses the GPU’s copy engine, i.e., via the GPU runtime’s
memcpy routine. The noncontiguous case uses the GPU’s
compute engine, i.e., via direct memory assignment in GPU
kernels.
Conclusions
This paper summarizes some of the technical challenges
in building a high-performance MPI library for exascale
parallel systems and describes solutions that MPICH adopted
to address these challenges. The layered design of MPICH
has enabled fast path communications that leverage hardware
acceleration while supporting full MPI functionalities
through software. MPICH uses the Virtual Communication
Interface (VCI) to isolate the communication traffic
generated by multithreaded MPI applications and map them
to independent network resources. This design reduces the
contention for concurrent MPI communication and improves
NIC utilization. MPICH further provides general support
for GPU buffers in MPI communication by introducing an
abstraction layer for GPU-related operations. Overall, these
advancements in MPICH library helped make it ready for
exascale supercomputers and furthered MPICH’s adoption
by vendor partners.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Exascale Computing
Project (17-SC-20-SC), a collaborative effort of the
U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science and the
National Nuclear Security Administration, and by the U.S.
Prepared using sagej.cls
16 Journal Title XX(X)
Department of Energy, Office of Science, under Contract
DE-AC02-06CH11357. This research used resources of the
Argonne Leadership Computing Facility, a U.S. Department
of Energy (DOE) Office of Science user facility at
Argonne National Laboratory and is based on research
supported by the U.S. DOE Office of Science Advanced
Scientific Computing Research Program, under Contract
No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. We gratefully acknowledge the
computing resources provided by the Laboratory Computing
Resource Center (LCRC) and the Joint Laboratory for
System Evaluation (JLSE) at Argonne National Laboratory.
This research also used resources of the Oak Ridge
Leadership Computing Facility at the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, which is supported by the Office of Science
of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract No. DEAC05-00OR22725. We also thank other developers and users
for their code contributions and experience reports.
References
(2013) Monte Carlo Benchmark (MCB). URL https://
codesign.llnl.gov/mcb.php.
(2017) Nekbone. URL https://github.com/Nek5000/
Nekbone.
ANL (2017) Center for exascale simulation for advanced reactors.
URL https://github.com/ANL-CESAR.
Balaji P, Buntinas D, Goodell D, Gropp W, Krishna J, Lusk E and
Thakur R (2010) PMI: A scalable parallel process-management
interface for extreme-scale systems. In: European MPI Users’
Group Meeting. Springer, pp. 31–41.
Bauer M, Treichler S, Slaughter E and Aiken A (2012) Legion:
Expressing locality and independence with logical regions. In:
SC ’12: Proceedings of the International Conference on High
Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis.
pp. 1–11. DOI:10.1109/SC.2012.71.
Bernholdt DE, Boehm S, Bosilca G, Gorentla Venkata M,
Grant RE, Naughton T, Pritchard HP, Schulz M and Vallee
GR (2020) A survey of MPI usage in the US Exascale
Computing Project. Concurrency and Computation: Practice
and Experience 32(3): e4851. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1002/cpe.
4851. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/abs/10.1002/cpe.4851. E4851 cpe.4851.
Bernholdt DE, Bosilca G, Bouteiller A, Brightwell R, Ciesko J,
Dosanjh MG, Georgakoudis G, Laguna I, Levy S, Naughton
T, Olivier SL, Pritchard HP, Schonbein W, Schuchart J and
Shehata A (2024) Taking the MPI standard and the Open
MPI library to exascale. The International Journal of High
Performance Computing Applications 38(5): 491–507. DOI:
10.1177/10943420241265936.
Chu CH, Hamidouche K, Venkatesh A, Awan AA and Panda DKD
(2016) CUDA kernel based collective reduction operations
on large-scale GPU clusters. In: Proceedings of the
16th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud,
and Grid Computing, CCGRID ’16. IEEE Press. ISBN
9781509024520, p. 726–735. DOI:10.1109/CCGrid.2016.
111. URL https://doi.org/10.1109/CCGrid.
2016.111.
Dinan J, Grant RE, Balaji P, Goodell D, Miller D, Snir M
and Thakur R (2014) Enabling communication concurrency
through flexible MPI endpoints. The International Journal of
High Performance Computing Applications 28(4): 390–405.
DOE (2017) CORAL Benchmarks. URL https://asc.llnl.
gov/CORAL-benchmarks.
ExaCT (2017) Center for exascale simulation of combustion
in turbulence. URL https://www.exactcodesign.
org/.
Fischer PF, Lottes JW, Kerkemeier SG et al. (2008) Nek5000:
Open source spectral element CFD solver. URL http://
nek5000.mcs.anl.gov.
Guo Y, Archer CJ, Blocksome M, Parker S, Bland W, Raffenetti
K and Balaji P (2017) Memory compression techniques
for network address management in MPI. In: 2017 IEEE
International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium
(IPDPS). pp. 1008–1017. DOI:10.1109/IPDPS.2017.18.
Habib S, Morozov V, Frontiere N, Finkel H, Pope A and Heitmann
K (2013) HACC: Extreme scaling and performance across
diverse architectures. In: Proceedings of the International
Conference on High Performance Computing, Networking,
Storage and Analysis, SC ’13. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450323789.
DOI:10.1145/2503210.2504566. URL https://doi.
org/10.1145/2503210.2504566.
Hashmi JM, Chu CH, Chakraborty S, Bayatpour M, Subramoni
H and Panda DK (2020) FALCON-X: Zero-copy MPI
derived datatype processing on modern CPU and GPU
architectures. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing
144: 1–13. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpdc.2020.05.008.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0743731520302872.
HPE (2024) HPE Slingshot interconnect. URL
https://www.hpe.com/us/en/compute/hpc/
slingshot-interconnect.html.
Intel (2020) Intel Omni-Path fabric host software – user guide.
URL https://www.intel.com/content/dam/
support/us/en/documents/network-and-i-o/
fabric-products/Intel_OP_Fabric_Host_
Software_UG_H76470_v16_0.pdf.
Intel (2024) Intel® Software Development Emulator (Intel®
SDE). URL https://www.intel.com/content/
www/us/en/developer/articles/tool/
software-development-emulator.html.
Karlin I, Keasler J and Neely R (2013) LULESH 2.0 updates and
changes. Technical Report LLNL-TR-641973.
Kim J, Baczewski AD, Beaudet TD, Benali A, Bennett MC, Berrill
MA, Blunt NS, Borda EJL, Casula M, Ceperley DM, Chiesa S,
Clark BK, Clay RC, Delaney KT, Dewing M, Esler KP, Hao H,
Heinonen O, Kent PRC, Krogel JT, Kylanp ¨ a¨a I, Li YW, Lopez ¨
MG, Luo Y, Malone FD, Martin RM, Mathuriya A, McMinis
J, Melton CA, Mitas L, Morales MA, Neuscamman E, Parker
WD, Flores SDP, Romero NA, Rubenstein BM, Shea JAR, Shin
H, Shulenburger L, Tillack AF, Townsend JP, Tubman NM,
Goetz BVD, Vincent JE, Yang DC, Yang Y, Zhang S and Zhao
L (2018) QMCPACK: An open source ab initio quantum Monte
Carlo package for the electronic structure of atoms, molecules
and solids. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 30(19):
195901. DOI:10.1088/1361-648X/aab9c3. URL https:
//dx.doi.org/10.1088/1361-648X/aab9c3.
Lin PT, Heroux MA, Barrett RF and Williams AB (2015) Assessing
a mini-application as a performance proxy for a finite element
method engineering application. Concurrency - Practice and
Prepared using sagej.cls
17
Experience 27(17): 5374–5389. DOI:10.1002/cpe.3587. URL
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/cpe.3587.
NASA (2017) NAS Parallel Benchmarks. URL https://www.
nas.nasa.gov/software/npb.html.
NVIDIA (2016) Mellanox adapters programmer’s reference manual. URL https://
network.nvidia.com/files/doc-2020/
ethernet-adapters-programming-manual.pdf.
OFI-Working-Group (2024) Libfabric programmer’s manual. URL
https://ofiwg.github.io/libfabric/.
Potluri S, Hamidouche K, Venkatesh A, Bureddy D and Panda
DK (2013) Efficient inter-node MPI communication using
GPUDirect RDMA for InfiniBand clusters with NVIDIA
GPUs. In: 2013 42nd International Conference on Parallel
Processing. pp. 80–89. DOI:10.1109/ICPP.2013.17.
Raffenetti K, Amer A, Oden L, Archer C, Bland W, Fujita H,
Guo Y, Janjusic T, Durnov D, Blocksome M, Si M, Seo S,
Langer A, Zheng G, Takagi M, Coffman P, Jose J, Sur S,
Sannikov A, Oblomov S, Chuvelev M, Hatanaka M, Zhao
X, Fischer P, Rathnayake T, Otten M, Min M and Balaji
P (2017) Why is MPI so slow? analyzing the fundamental
limits in implementing MPI-3.1. In: Proceedings of the
International Conference for High Performance Computing,
Networking, Storage and Analysis, SC ’17. New York,
NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN
9781450351140. DOI:10.1145/3126908.3126963. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3126908.3126963.
Ross R, Miller N and Gropp WD (2003) Implementing fast and
reusable datatype processing. In: European Parallel Virtual
Machine/Message Passing Interface Users’ Group Meeting.
Springer, pp. 404–413.
Sheehan TJ, Shelton WA, Pratt TJ, Papadopoulos PM, LoCascio
P and Dunigan TH (1998) The locally self-consistent
multiple scattering code in a geographically distributed linked
MPP environment. Parallel Computing 24(12): 1827–
1846. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0167-8191(98)00080-5.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0167819198000805.
Suresh KK, Khorassani KS, Chen CC, Ramesh B, Abduljabbar M,
Shafi A, Subramoni H and Panda DK (2022) Network assisted
non-contiguous transfers for GPU-aware MPI libraries. In:
2022 IEEE Symposium on High-Performance Interconnects
(HOTI). pp. 13–20. DOI:10.1109/HOTI55740.2022.00018.
UCF-Consortium (2024) Unified communication X. URL https:
//openucx.org.
Valiev M, Bylaska E, Govind N, Kowalski K, Straatsma T,
Van Dam H, Wang D, Nieplocha J, Apra E, Windus
T and de Jong W (2010) NWChem: A comprehensive
and scalable open-source solution for large scale molecular
simulations. Computer Physics Communications 181(9):
1477–1489. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2010.04.018.
URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0010465510001438.
Zambre R, Chandramowlishwaran A and Balaji P (2020) How
I learned to stop worrying about user-visible endpoints and
love MPI. In: Proceedings of the 34th ACM International
Conference on Supercomputing, ICS ’20. New York, NY, USA:
Association for Computing Machinery. ISBN 9781450379830.
DOI:10.1145/3392717.3392773. URL https://doi.
org/10.1145/3392717.3392773.
Zhou H, Raffenetti K, Guo Y and Thakur R (2022) MPIX stream:
An explicit solution to hybrid MPI+X programming. In:
Proceedings of the 29th European MPI Users’ Group Meeting.
pp. 1–10.
Prepared using sagej.cls