Conference PaperPDF Available

# Implementation and performance analysis of non-blocking collective operations for MPI

- November 2007

DOI: 10.1145/1362622.1362692

- Source
- DBLP
- Conference: Proceedings of the ACM/IEEE Conference on High Performance Networking and Computing, SC 2007, November 10-16, 2007, Reno, Nevada, USA

Authors:

Torsten Hoefler

- ETH Zurich

Andrew Lumsdaine

- PNNL and University of Washington

Wolfgang Rehm

- Chemnitz University of Technology

Download full-text PDF

Read full-text

Download citation

Copy link Link copied

---

Read full-text Download citation
Copy link Link copied

## Abstract and Figures

Collective operations and non-blocking point-to-point oper- ations have always been part of MPI. Although non-blocking collective operations are an obvious extension to MPI, there have been no comprehensive studies of this functionality. In this paper we present LibNBC, a portable high-performance library for implementing non-blocking collective MPI com- munication operations. LibNBC provides non-blocking ver- sions of all MPI collective operations, is layered on top of MPI-1, and is portable to nearly all parallel architectures. To measure the performance characteristics of our imple- mentation, we also present a microbenchmark for measuring both latency and overlap of computation and communica- tion. Experimental results demonstrate that the blocking performance of the collective operations in our library is comparable to that of collective operations in other high- performance MPI implementations. Our library introduces a very low overhead between the application and the un- derlying MPI and thus, in conjunction with the potential to overlap communication with computation, offers the poten- tial for optimizing real-world applications.

Example of a schedule creation of rank 1 in a communicator with 7 processes.\
\
…

Schedule layout in memory.\
\
…

Figures - uploaded by Andrew Lumsdaine

Author content

All figure content in this area was uploaded by Andrew Lumsdaine

Content may be subject to copyright.

Discover the world's research

- 25+ million members
- 160+ million publication pages
- 2.3+ billion citations

Join for free

Content uploaded by Andrew Lumsdaine

Author content

All content in this area was uploaded by Andrew Lumsdaine

Content may be subject to copyright.

Implementation and Performance Analysis of

Non-Blocking Collective Operations for MPI

Torsten Hoeﬂer

Open Systems Laboratory

Indiana University

501 N. Morton Street

Bloomington, IN 47404 USA

htor@cs.indiana.edu

Andrew Lumsdaine

Open Systems Laboratory

Indiana University

501 N. Morton Street

Bloomington, IN 47404 USA

lums@cs.indiana.edu

Wolfgang Rehm

Dept. of Computer Science

Chemnitz University of

Technology

Strasse der Nationen 62

Chemnitz, 09107 GERMANY

rehm@cs.tu-chemnitz.de

ABSTRACT

Collective operations and non-blocking point-to-point oper-

ations have always been part of MPI. Although non-blocking

collective operations are an obvious extension to MPI, there

have been no comprehensive studies of this functionality. In

this paper we present LibNBC, a portable high-performance

library for implementing non-blocking collective MPI com-

munication operations.LibNBC provides non-blocking ver-

sions of all MPI collective operations, is layered on top of

MPI-1, and is portable to nearly all parallel architectures.

To measure the performance characteristics of our imple-

mentation, we also present a microbenchmark for measuring

both latency and overlap of computation and communica-

tion.Experimental results demonstrate that the blocking

performance of the collective operations in our library is

comparable to that of collective operations in other high-

performance MPI implementations.Our library introduces

a very low overhead between the application and the un-

derlying MPI and thus, in conjunction with the potential to

overlap communication with computation, oﬀers the poten-

tial for optimizing real-world applications.

Keywords

MPI, non-blocking communication, collective operations,non-

blocking collective operations, overlap

1. INTRODUCTION

The Message Passing Interface (MPI) standard is a widely

used programming interface for parallel high-performance

computing that includes a wide variety of point-to-point and

group communication operations.The blocking collective

operations currently deﬁned by MPI oﬀer a high-level inter-

face to the user, insulating the user from implementation de-

tails and giving MPI implementers the freedom to optimize

their implementations for speciﬁc architectures.That is,

although collective algorithms do not provide unique func-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for

personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are

not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies

bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, to

republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc

permission and/or a fee.

SC07 November 10-16, 2007, Reno, Nevada, USA

Copyright 2007 ACM 978-1-59593-764-3/07/0011...$5.00.

tionality per se(they can be implemented manually with

basic point-to-point operations),collective operationspro-

vide important advantages in programmability, safety (with

regards to programming errors) and performance.

In this respect,collective operationscanbe compared

to BLAS [31] operations.For example a high-level BLAS

matrix multiply (e.g., DGEMM) operation could be easily

composed of three nested loops1,but the vendor supplied

DGEMM implementation, because of special machine op-

timized tuning (e.g., cache/register optimization),usually

provides much better performance.The same principle is

used for collective operations as these operations can be op-

timized for the communication subsystem of a speciﬁcma-

chine.Thus, many research groups have provided machine-

optimized implementations and have investigated the opti-

mal and non-trivial implementation of collective algorithms

for particular machine architectures (cf.[7, 13, 19, 34, 41,

43, 44]).

The performance portability beneﬁts of collective oper-

ations have long been recognized and collective operations

play an important role in many applications (cf.[40]).Con-

sider for example a three-dimensional Fast Fourier Trans-

formation implemented for a central-switch-based architec-

ture (e.g., InﬁniBandTM).If the developer does not use the

MPI Alltoall function, a fully connected send pattern (lit-

erally an all-to-all) should deliver the best performance2.

However,if this implementation were to be portedto torus-

based systems (e.g., an IBM BlueGene), the performance

of the send-pattern mentioned above would be much worse

than a torus-optimized MPI Alltoall on that machine.How-

ever, because the collective operation interface is architec-

ture independent, using it can avoid this performance de-

crease transparently, i.e., without changes to the user appli-

cation.

A second MPI feature that plays a signiﬁcant role in par-

allel programming is non-blocking point-to-point communi-

cation.These operations potentially allow communication

and computation to be overlapped and thus to leverage hard-

ware parallelism. The parallelism exists because most high-

performance interconnect networks (like InﬁniBandTM [42],

Quadrics [39], Myrinet [38], Portals, or Ethernet with TOE)

have their owncommunication co-processors that take the

1or lower level BLAS operations

2in fact, most MPI implementations use this communication

pattern to implement MPI Alltoall on central-switch-based

architectures

burden of message processing of the main CPU. However,

this parallelism does not decrease the latency signiﬁcantly,

and it does not show its full potential if the programmer

uses blocking send/receive.Non-blocking send/receive tech-

niques allow the programmer to leverage the CPU during

the asynchronous (and network-oﬄoaded) message trans-

mission.Several studies showed that the performance of

parallel applications can besigniﬁcantly enhanced with over-

lapping techniques (cf. [1, 3, 6, 9, 33]).

Our work investigates the possibility of combining the ad-

vantagesofcollective operations withoverlapped commu-

nication and computation in modern communication archi-

tectures.We propose a low-overhead and portable imple-

mentation of non-blocking collective operations that hides

all the complexity of the internal implementation from the

user.A new benchmark that measures the possible overlap

of collective operations and overlap-optimized application

kernels demonstrate the potential of our implementation.

The following section will introduce the idea of non-blocking

collective operations.Section 3 describes our portable im-

plementation, followedby a microbenchmark that assess the

possible overlap and evaluates our implementationand the

underlying layers in Section 4.Application kernels are dis-

cussed in Section 5.Final conclusions and an outlook to

future work in this ﬁeldare presentedin the last section.

2.NON-BLOCKING COLLECTIVE OPER-

ATIONS

Non-blocking collective operations to overlap communica-

tion and computation are not directly supported by the MPI

standard.The approach (long accepted by the conventional

wisdom) to emulating this functionality is to perform the

blocking collective operation in a separate thread on the a

duplicated communicator.Unfortunately, this approach has

not been proven to be usable in practice.First, this ap-

proach would require an MPI-2 implementation that oﬀers

full MPI THREAD MULTIPLE (cp.[15]) support without a

“big lock”(the use of which would limit performance signif-

icantly).There have been few, if any, such implementations

widely available.Second, theadministration of threads is a

complex task for programmers (particularly with languages

like Fortran that were notintended for systems program-

ming) and would consist of signiﬁcant amounts of “boiler-

plate”code.This approach is contrary to the philosophy of

MPI which is to isolate the user from these kinds of complex-

ities.Third, the needed communicator duplication, being a

collective operation in itself, can also be very expensive.Fi-

nally,we remark that the conventional wisdom seems to be

unevenly applied.That is, absent the above objections (e.g.,

even if the administration of threads could be simpliﬁed),

one could make the argument that non-blocking point-to-

point operations could also be provided using blocking op-

erations plus threads.Yet, MPI provides a direct interface

to non-blocking point-to-point operations.

These complications have led diﬀerent groups to the con-

clusion that a non-blocking interface for collective opera-

tions would be useful.The MPI Journal of Development

[36]deﬁnessocalled “splitcollectives” thatenableoverlap-

ping in a very limited way.Another interface was proposed

by IBM for their parallel environment [24].Some research

groups experimented with non-blocking collective operations

based on non-blocking point-to-point messages (e.g.,[12,

1MPI_Request req;

int arr[100];

MPI_Ibcast(arr, 100, MPI_INT, 0,

5MPI_COMM_WORLD, &req);

/\* do independent computation */

MPI_Wait(&req);

Listing 1:Non-blocking Interface to Collective Rou-

tines

28]).MPI/RT [29] also oﬀers a non-blocking interface to

collective operations.But due to the channel semantics, this

interface is diﬀerent from the MPI interface and can not be

easily adopted to existing programs.Additionally, to the

best knowledge of the authors, neither performance analy-

ses nor implementation details about overlappable collective

operations in MPI/RT have been published.

Using key ideas from these approaches we deﬁned a stan-

dard proposal fornon-blocking collective operations in [20].

For example,an MPI Ibcast is nearly identical to its block-

ing variant MPI Bcast.Listing 1 shows an example code for

a non-blocking broadcast.

Non-blocking collectives oﬀer the possibility of overlap-

ping communication and computation for collective oper-

ations while additionally mitigating the eﬀects of pseudo-

synchronization.Pseudo-synchronization occurs for many

collective algorithms due to data-dependencies in the com-

munication pattern (receivers have to wait for senders).This

turns out to be a problem on large-scale machines when

the process skew between processing units becomes signif-

icant [4, 27].Non-blocking collective operations can move

the pseudo-synchronization to the background and allow the

user application to tolerate process skew to a certain extent.

A detailed discussion of pseudo-synchronization and its ef-

fect on parallel program runs is given in [20, 21].

All those eﬀects can beneﬁt real-world applications.Pre-

liminary results show that non-blocking collectives are also

able to decrease the latency and bandwidth sensitivity of

some applications.A study with a3d-Poisson solver [17]

shows that Gigabit Ethernet is able to deliver nearly the

same performance as InﬁniBandTM because the algorithm

supports full overlap.

3.IMPLEMENTATION IN LIBNBC

LibNBC is written in ANSI C and is a portable imple-

mentation of our non-blocking collective proposal on top of

MPI-1 [18].All currently implemented algorithms are op-

timized for central-switch based networks and extensively

tested with InﬁniBandTM connected systems.The full im-

plementation is open source and available for public down-

load on the LibNBC website [32].The central part ofLibNBC

is the collective schedule.A schedule consists of the opera-

tions that have to be performed to accomplish the collective

task (e.g., an MPI Isend,MPI Irecv).The collective algo-

rithm is implemented as in the blocking case, based on point-

to-point messages.However, instead of performing all oper-

ations immediately, they are saved in the collective schedule

together with their dependencies.New algorithms can read-

ily be incorporated into LibNBC as the internal API to do

so is nearly identical to MPI. A detailed manual about the

addition of new collective algorithms and the internal and

external programming interfaces of LibNBC is availablein

[18].

Data-dependencies in many collective algorithms (e.g., an

intermediate rank in a broadcast tree can not pass the data

on until it receives it) make it necessary to provide some

synchronization mechanism.Our collective schedule intro-

duces a round-based scheme, where operations of round n

can only be started if all operations ofround n−1 have been

ﬁnished locally. Theround based scheme is applicable to all

collective algorithms because the simplest schedule, where

all rounds consist of a single operation, exists for all algo-

rithms (equals to a blocking execution).However, the ability

to issue more than one operation per round provides an ad-

ditional level of parallelism and beneﬁts the non-blocking

execution (i.e., it adds the ability to overlap communication

with communication as described by Bell et al.in [5]).

Each schedule is speciﬁc to each rank of a communicator

and depends onthe MPI-argument set.A particular ex-

ample for the creation of a binomial tree-based MPI Bcast

schedule is shown in Figure 1.The left side if Figure 1

shows the broadcast tree with 7 processes wherethever-

tices in the graphs denote the ranks in the communicator;

the edges stand for the send operations.The edge-numbers

indicate the virtual communication round in which the send

occurs.The pseudocode to create the schedule is shown in

the right side of Figure 1.The schedule for rank 1 consists of

three rounds.The ﬁrst round contains only a single receive

(NBC Sched recv which represents an MPI Irecv) and is ter-

minated with a call to NBC Sched barr() (which represents

an MPI Waitall on all open requests).This means that the

second round is not started before the message is received

(necessary for correctness of the broadcast).The following

two rounds could be merged into a single round with two

sends (NBCSchedsend which represents an MPI Isend), but

we begin the second send after waiting for the ﬁrst one to

ﬁnish to avoid network congestion.Note that a schedule

could be reused if the same collective operation with the

same arguments is issued by the user again.

NBC_Sched_send(buf, count, dt, 3, schedule);

3

33

2

2

1

3

4

56

0

12

Pseudocode for schedule at rank 1:

NBC_Sched_recv(buf, count, dt, 0, schedule);

NBC_Sched_barr(schedule);

NBC_Sched_barr(schedule);

NBC_Sched_send(buf, count, dt, 5, schedule);

Figure 1:Example of a schedule creation of rank 1

in a communicator with 7 processes.

To ensure cache-eﬃciency, a schedule is stored as a lin-

ear array in memory.Its building blocks are C structs that

represent the arguments of an operation.A send opera-

tion structure, for example,accommodates buﬀer pointer

(void*), count (int), datatype (MPI Datatype) and destina-

tion rank (int), which equals a total of 32 bytes on a typical

64 bit machine.The biggest struct, representing the exe-

cution of an MPI Op, is 48 bytes.This design makes the

schedule-execution extremely cache-friendly and keeps the

memory overhead low.However, the schedule creation can

be expensive because of the need to usedynamically sized

contiguous arrays.

end

recv from 0endsend to 5

send to 3

Figure 2:Schedule layout in memory.

We introduced a low overhead implementationtechnique

for non-blocking collective operations.The next section

presents data from a benchmark we designed to document

the beneﬁts inherent in overlapping communication and com-

putation.

4.MEASURING THE POSSIBLE OVERLAP

We designeda microbenchmark, named NBCBench, to

measure the performance of all blocking and non-blocking

collective operations.The benchmark source code is avail-

able at the LibNBC website [32].One important diﬀerence

of our design, compared to established benchmarks such as

the Intel (formerly Pallas)Microbenchmarks (IMB), is that

we benchmark the exact time for a single collective opera-

tion on each node.We do not measure pipelining eﬀects as

most benchmarks do by issuing Ncollective operations in a

row and dividing the measured time by N.Measuring single

operations can often deliver interesting results that diﬀer sig-

niﬁcantly from pipelined transfers (cf.[22]).Single message

measurements require a high precision timer that is typically

oﬀered as a platform dependent CPU instruction and a low

process skew.Our implementation uses the X86 RDTSC

[26] instruction to measure times with the accuracy of CPU-

ticks.However, the timing routine can be easily exchanged

with any other high-precision timer (e.g., MPI Wtime). A

low inter-process skew is guaranteed by a call to MPI Barrier

or an internal Dissemination Barrier (cf. [16]) implementa-

tion, which limits the inter-process skew to asingle latency,

before every measurement.

4.1Benchmarking MPI collective operations

The use of high-precision timers enables us to accurately

measure the node-localtimeofevery operation.As a result,

every node measures the execution time of its part of the

collective operation.The local time to perform a collective

operation can be split up into two parts.The ﬁrst part is

the synchronization time, i.e., the time anode waits until

it receives its ﬁrst data element.This time depends on the

algorithm3and on the parallel skew among the processes

(e.g., if one process is delayed).Thesecond part is the time

during which the nodes performthe actualalgorithm.A

benchmark is usually only able to measure the sumof these

parts.However, our benchmark minimizes the process skew

by synchronizing all nodes with a barrier call before every

measurement.The user is free to select between MPI Barrier

or an internal dissemination barrier implementation based

on MPI Send/MPIRecv that guarantees the skew will be no

more than a singlepoint-to-point latency (cf.dissemination

barrier described in [16]) .

The benchmark performsauser-deﬁned number ofopera-

tions (default:50) for every communicator size and message

3Nota bene:the time is zerofor some operations or nodes,

e.g., all nodes in MPI Alltoall, orthe root node in MPI Bcast.

1MPI_Barrier(comm) or Internal_Barrier(comm);

start_time = take_time();

MPI_Bcast(buf, count, type, root, comm);

total_time = take_time() - start_time;

Listing 2:Pseudocode for NBCBench to measure

(example MPI Bcast)

size (also user-deﬁnable).Listing 2 shows pseudo-code for

the part of the inner loop that measures the MPI perfor-

mance of the blocking collective operations.

4.2Benchmarking non-blocking collective op-

erations

The goal of the microbenchmark introduced in this arti-

cle is to study theoverlap potential and the remaining non-

overlappable overhead ofnon-blocking collective operations.

In order to study and discuss these issues we ﬁrst make the

distinction between network latency and CPU overhead (cf.

LogP model in [11]).Latencyis the time toperform the col-

lective communication operation and overhead is the CPU

time that is needed in this process.In the case ofblocking

operations, the overhead is larger than the latency because

the function may only return after the communication has

ﬁnished.Non-blocking operationsallow the userto overlap

parts of the latencywithindependent computation (cf.Sec-

tion 1) while the overhead still accounts towards the parallel

running time.As longas independent computation can pro-

ceed, the latency is not signiﬁcant for the running time of

the parallel computation because it is overlapped.However,

the overhead, because it blocks the CPU, still increases the

parallel execution time.In practice, the overhead denotes

the time that is spent in communication functions and in the

network stack of the operating system.We assume that the

full communication latency can potentially be overlapped by

the user application4.

The inner benchmark loop is similar to the loop explained

in the previous section.However, the time to issue a non-

blocking operation in ablocking manner without any overlap

(calling the initiation function and the ﬁnish functionwith-

out any delay between them) is benchmarked before the ac-

tual run.The measurement, presented as pseudo-code in

Listing 3, begins, like in the blockingcase, with a synchro-

nization to avoid process skews larger than a single point-

to-point latency.The next operation issues anon-blocking

communication operation and measure the time of this func-

tion call that is added to the overhead later.The second op-

eration simulates the independent computation that runs at

least as long as the blocking latency measured before the ac-

tual benchmark.This computation issues several NBC Test

calls to progress LibNBC internally5(progression strategies

are discussed later).The time to perform the test calls is

also added to the overhead.The last operation, NBC Wait,

ﬁnishes the communication and is ideally a no-op (i.e., the

4If the time of the independent communication and the over-

head is known, it is trivial tocalculate the potential overlap

for real applications, even if the full-overlap criteria is not

met.

5This is not necessary to ensure the non-blocking seman-

tics but improves the overlap, similar to calling MPI Test on

outstanding MPI Requests.

MPI_Barrier(comm) or Internal_Barrier(comm);

start_time = take_time();

NBC_Ibcast(buf, count, type, root, comm,

4handle);

init_time = take_time() - start_time;

test_time = do_computation_test(duration);

before_wait = take_time();

8NBC_Wait(handle)

wait_time = take_time() - before_wait;

total_time = take_time() - start_time;

Listing 3:Pseudocodefor NBCBench (example

MPI Bcast)

communication has already been ﬁnished).The time to per-

form this call is also measured seperately and added to the

overhead.

The results gathered with this benchmark can be consid-

ered a bound on the minimum possible overhead and the

maximum possible overlap.

The measurement results in a distributed two-dimensional

matrix of values. Every node has its own times for the mul-

tiple measurements.The reduction of those node-speciﬁc

results can be chosen by a command-line parameter (mini-

mum, maximum, average, median); the median will be used

for all results of this paper.The ﬁnal output can either

be the reduced times of all nodes, which gets messy if the

node-number is reasonably high but it isuseful to analyze

process skew introduced by the collective algorithm itself, or

the maximum time of all nodes.We chose the maximum,

because this willusually determinethe parallelrunning time

of a load-balanced parallel application.

The possible overlap of LibNBC is highly MPI implemen-

tation and network dependent becausenon-blocking MPI

send/receive calls are used to perform the operations.Sev-

eral studies and benchmarks [23, 25, 30] assess the possible

overlap of non-blocking point-to-point operations for diﬀer-

ent MPI implementations and show diﬀerent results.Our

benchmark is able to measure the overlap potential and over-

head of blocking and non-blocking point-to-point as well as

blocking and non-blocking collective operations.

4.3Experimental Setup

We conducted all benchmarks on the odin cluster sys-

tem at Indiana University. This systemconsists of 128 dual

Opteron 270 dual core nodes with 4 GB RAM. Thenodes

are interconnected with 10 GBit/s InﬁniBandTM and Giga-

bit Ethernet.

We used MVAPICH 0.9.4 [35] for the communication over

InﬁniBandTM and Open MPI 1.1 [14] for the communication

over InﬁniBandTM and Gigabit Ethernet (TCP). We used

LibNBC version 0.9 available at [32].

4.4Benchmark Results

We investigated two MPI implementations, MVAPICH

and Open MPI, that are able touse InﬁniBandTM to com-

municate.The left graphin Figure 3 shows the relation

between communicated datasize and the overhead for anon-

blocking all-gather on 64 nodes forLibNBC (NBC) and the

native MPI implementation (MPI) running with Open MPI

and MVAPICH on InﬁniBandTM.The share of the over-

lappable latency (compared to a blocking execution) using

LibNBC with the both MPI implementations is presented

in the right graph in Figure 3.Both graphs show that the

performance as well as the overlap depends heavily on the

used MPI library.A blocking execution of LibNBC, i.e.,

NBC Iallgather immediately followed by NBC Wait, delivers

similar performance to the implementation of MPI Allgather

in MVAPICH because itisbased on a similar point-to-point

communication pattern.

Figure 4 shows comparative results between fully over-

lapped operations with LibNBC and blocking operations

with MVAPICH, which oﬀers currently the fastest imple-

mentation of collective algorithms on InﬁniBandTM. Bench-

mark results for all collective operations of Open MPI with

TCP and InﬁniBandTM, MVAPICH, and MPICH2 can be

found on [32].

These results show that the advantage of non-blocking col-

lective operations can be quite substantial on InﬁniBandTM

cluster systems.This assumption can theoretically be

extended to all oﬄoading-based interconnects.However,

the overlap potential for small messages is naturally much

lower than for large messages.This is mostly due to non-

overlappable overhead,which we discuss in thenext section.

It can also be seenthat somealgorithms,as for example

MPI Bcast, require furthertuning tosupport better overlap.

This is subject of future research and can be done withthe

collective schedule frameworkof LibNBC.

4.5Sources of Overhead

Tounderstand theresults gatheredby the microbench-

mark, we discuss the sources of overhead and the overhead

scaling with the communicator size.This overhead is the

part of the latency of a non-blocking collective operation

that is executed by the main CPUand can thus not be

overlapped.This makes the overhead-reduction one of the

most important goals in implementing a library that oﬀers

non-blocking operations.The library can of course only use

the CPU when it gets called and overhead is spent in the ini-

tialization (e.g., NBC Ibcast), test and wait functions.Fur-

thermore, the sum oftime spent in thosefunctions is the

communication overhead.

The diﬀerent parts of the overhead, named in the previous

sections, depend on many factors.All those partialcosts

scale diﬀerently with communicatorsize and message size

and add up to the ﬁnal overhead of LibNBC. The diﬀerent

sources of non-overlappable overhead are:

•Schedule creation (costs to create the node-localsched-

ule).The schedule creation cost does not depend on

the message size but grows with the communicator

size.

•Copy overhead (costs for the required localcopy opera-

tion from sendbuﬀer to receivebuﬀer, e.g., MPI Alltoall).

The local copy overhead depends only on the message

size because the problem is massively parallel.

•MPI Isend/MPI Irecv overhead (overhead of the

MPI Isend/MPI Irecvin the MPI library).The cost

of issuing MPI Isends and MPI Irecvs is determined by

both factors.The number of issued operations can de-

pend on the communicator size and data size (if seg-

menting and pipelining is used).

•MPI Test/MPIWait overhead (costs to progress/ﬁnish

these operations in the MPI library).The time to is-

sue such an operation could depend on the datasize.

This is especially important for InﬁniBandTM where

the registration of send and receive memory can be

expensive [37].

4.6Different Progress Types

The current implementation of LibNBC does not oﬀer

true asynchronous progress.The addition of a progress-

thread would be simple but would require the underly-

ing MPI implementation to be thread-safe (support of

MPI THREAD MULTIPLE). Most current MPI implemen-

tations do not oﬀer this feature in a well performing way.

Thus, we did not use threads to keep LibNBC portable to

many parallel architectures and MPI libraries.

Because round-transitions in collective schedules can only

be done by LibNBC itself, itshould be called periodically to

ensure the best overlap potential.NBC Test tries to progress

all outstanding operations and starts anew round if thecur-

rently active one is ﬁnished.Besides LibNBC, the MPI li-

brary also needs to progress outstanding messagetransfers.

Without a separate progress thread, there isonly one way

to progress an outstanding MPI operation.This is done by

giving the control to the MPI library by calling some MPI

function (e.g., MPI Test).Most MPI implementations (e.g.

Open MPI, MVAPICH and MPICH) try to ﬁnish active re-

quests internally.NBC Test calls MPI Testall on all MPIre-

quests, so that NBC and MPI progress can be guaranteed.

NBC Wait calls NBC Test until the collective operation has

ﬁnished.

However,calling test functionsintroduces a constant over-

head (at least the function call and the status-check of all

requests).On one hand,progressing outstanding operations

with tests may accelerate the operation inthe background,

but the constant overhead may decrease the overall perfor-

mance in case of many tests/requests.

The number of necessary tests depends mainly on the

length of outstanding requests because each NBC Test tests

all outstanding operations to all hosts.The majority of

the overhead in NBC Test is caused by the internal call to

MPI Testall that is in itself highly implementation depen-

dent.It can be assumed that the cost for NBC Test grows

linearly with the number of outstanding requests.

The overhead for a single NBC Test for increasing commu-

nicator sizes on top of Open MPI and MVAPICH is shown

in Figure 5.The test-frequency was chosen proportional to

the data-size in this example; a NBC Test is issued for each

2048 bytes sent/received.

5.APPLICATION RESULTS

We tested the eﬀectiveness of overlapping communication

and computation in three situations.In the compression ap-

plication, we analyze data-gather in a pipelined fashion.We

applied similar pipelining techniques to a three-dimensional

Fourier Transformation and we optimized a conjugate gra-

dient solver with non-blocking collective operations.

5.1Parallel Compression

Compression is widely used in the gathering and analy-

sis of scientiﬁc data.The tremendous amount of data and

computationally demanding compression algorithms (e.g.,

bzip2 [8]) force scientists to parallelize the computation among

0

20000

40000

60000

80000

100000

120000

140000

0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000

Runtime (s)

Datasize (bytes)

MVAPICH/NBC

Open MPI/NBC

MVAPICH/MPI

Open MPI/MPI

0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000

Share of overlappable Latency

Datasize (bytes)

MVAPICH

Open MPI

Figure 3:Left:NBC Iallgatherand MPI Allgatheroverhead on Open MPI 1.1 and MVAPICH 0.9.4 on 64

InﬁniBandTM-connected nodes, Right:share of the overlappable latency

multiple processing units.Thisparallelization requires two

communication operations, the distribution of the input and

a gathering of the compressed data.Both operations are ide-

ally implemented as collective communications.We analyze

only the data gathering and apply a simple pipeline scheme

to overlap communication and computation for this prob-

lem.We gather the data withMPI Gather for the original

blocking base-case.The non-blocking variant communicates

the ﬁrst block of compressed data as soon as it is produced

with NBC Igather in a non-blocking manner and pipelines

the communication of the remaining blocks..

Figure 6 shows the parallel speedup for a ﬁxed problem

size of 15.25 MiB random data (the compression isvery

compute-intensive, i.e., a single processor needs 2:40 min

to compress the data).All measurements have been con-

ducted on the odin clustersystemwithMVAPICH using

InﬁniBandTMand Open MPI using TCP over Gigabit Eth-

ernet.Diﬀerent parameters as block size and the number of

outstanding communications have been adjusted to achieve

the best possible result (this tuning process is outside the

scope of this article).The use of non-blocking collective

operations increases the parallel speedup substantially for

both interconnects (the performance gainon InﬁniBandTM

is naturally smaller because the communication latency is

much lowerthan for Gigabit Ethernet).

5.2Parallel Fourier Transformation

The same pipelining technique can be applied to a par-

allel three-dimensional Fourier transform.We chose a well

known scheme [2, 10] as the base case to apply ourtrans-

formations.This scheme transforms the data in the x and y

directions, performs a parallel transpose (MPI Alltoall) and

ﬁnishes the transformation in the z direction.We applied

non-blocking collective operations in a pipelined manner to

the transposition.The communication ofaz-plane can be

started as soon as this plane istransformed in the x and

y directions (and runs concurrently to the transformation

of the remaining planes).However, we also applied tech-

niques that coalesces multiple planes to reach a reasonable

communication data size.Figure 7 shows the results for

InﬁniBandTM.The results show a substantial performance

improvementfor the parallel Fourier transform.

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16

Speedup

# Processors

MPI_Alltoall

NBC_Ialltoall

Figure 7:Speedup of a parallel 3d-FFT using

InﬁniBandTM

5.3Parallel Conjugate Gradient Solver

We showed ina formerstudy[17] that non-blocking col-

lective operations can easily be applied to problems that

exhibit some kind ofdata parallelism (i.e.,independent com-

putation is available).Our example application uses a con-

jugate gradient method to solve a three-dimensional poisson

equation.The problem is distributed on a 3d-domain where

the communication of the halo zones is naturally overlapped

with the computation of the innermatrixelements.The

changes to the original algorithm are trivial and the per-

formance beneﬁts aresubstantial.The communication uses

MPI Alltoallv (in lack of a collective communication opera-

tion for nearest-neighbor communication).The performance

results ars shown in Figure 8.

6.CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

Traditionally, scientists have not been able to fully lever-

age the performance beneﬁt of overlapping communication

and computation because MPI onlysupports blocking col-

lective operations.In this paper, we introduce LibNBC, a

portable high-performance library that provides non-blocking

0

10000

20000

30000

40000

50000

60000

0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000

Runtime (s)

Datasize (bytes)

MPI_Allgatherv

NBC_Iallgatherv

0

10000

20000

30000

40000

50000

60000

0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000

Runtime (us)

Datasize (bytes)

MPI_Allreduce

NBC_Iallreduce

0

5000

10000

15000

20000

25000

30000

35000

40000

45000

50000

0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000

Runtime (us)

Datasize (bytes)

MPI_Alltoall

NBC_Ialltoall

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

3000

3500

0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000

Runtime (s)

Datasize (bytes)

MPI_Bcast

NBC_Ibcast

0

5000

10000

15000

20000

25000

30000

0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000

Runtime (us)

Datasize (bytes)

MPI_Gather

NBC_Igather

0

5000

10000

15000

20000

25000

30000

0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000

Runtime (us)

Datasize (bytes)

MPI_Scatter

NBC_Iscatter

Figure 4:Overhead comparison between blocking (e.g., MPI Allgatherv) and non-blocking (e.g., NBC Iallgatherv)

implementations with overlap for diﬀerent collective operations ontopofMVAPICH

0

5000

10000

15000

20000

25000

0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000

Runtime (us)

Datasize (bytes)

MVAPICH/NBC

Open MPI/NBC

0

2000

4000

6000

8000

10000

12000

14000

16000

18000

20000

0 50000 100000 150000 200000 250000 300000

Runtime (us)

Datasize (bytes)

MVAPICH/NBC

Open MPI/NBC

Figure 5:NBC Test overhead for NBC Iallgather(left) and NBC Iallreduce(right) for Open MPI and MVAPICH

on 64 InﬁniBandTM nodes.

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

Speedup

# Processors

MPI_Gather

NBC_Igather

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100

Speedup

# Processors

MPI_Gather

NBC_Igather

Figure 6:Speedup of a parallel compression using InﬁniBandTM(left) and Gigabit Ethernet (right).

0

20

40

60

80

100

8 16 24 32 40 48 56 64 72 80 88 96

Speedup

Number of CPUs

MPI_Alltoallv

NBC_Ialltoallv

0

20

40

60

80

100

8 16 24 32 40 48 56 64 72 80 88 96

Speedup

Number of CPUs

MPI_Alltoallv

NBC_Ialltoallv

Figure 8:Speedup of a parallel conjugate gradient using InﬁniBandTM(left) and Gigabit Ethernet (right).

versions of all collective operations.Thus, for the ﬁrst time,

fully portable and MPI compliant non-blocking collective

operations are available for overlapping communication and

computation.

Wefurther designed a microbenchmark to measure the

performance of all blocking and non-blocking operations.

Overlapping communication and computation using non-

blocking collective operations has been proven to be use-

ful.We showed that the communication of large messages

on large communicators can be eﬃciently overlapped on

InﬁniBandTM systems.Smaller messages realize a lesser

gain due to diﬀerent overheads.Application results also

demonstrate the beneﬁts of our implementation.

One promising direction for future research is the oﬄoad-

ing of the progress engine to another processing unit, such

as an intelligent network interface, network co-processor or

even a dedicated core on a multi-core CPU. Furthermore,

we will develop a parallel model to assess running time and

overlap potential of our implementation and non-blocking

collectives in general.The optimization of the implemented

algorithms in LibNBC, to ensure highest parallelism and

overlap, will also be a direction of future research.

The NBC-Library is available at:

http://www.unixer.de/NBC

Acknowledgements

Pro Siobhan.The authors want to thank Laura Hopkins

from Indiana University for editorial comments and helpful

discussions.This work was supported by a grant from the

Lilly Endowment, National Science Foundation grant EIA-

0202048 and a gift the Silicon Valley Community Foundation

on behalf of theCiscoCollaborative Research Initiative and

a grant by the Saxon Ministry of Science and the Fine Arts.

7. REFERENCES

[1]T. S. Abdelrahman and G. Liu. Overlap of

computation and communication on shared-memory

networks-of-workstations. Cluster computing, pages

35–45, 2001.

[2]A. Adelmann, W. P. P. A. Bonelli and, and C. W.

Ueberhuber. Communication eﬃciency of parallel 3d

ﬀts. In High Performance Computing for

Computational Science - VECPAR 2004, 6th

International Conference, Valencia, Spain, June

28-30, 2004, Revised Selected and Invited Papers,

volume 3402 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,

pages 901–907. Springer, 2004.

[3]F. Baude, D. Caromel, N. Furmento, and D. Sagnol.

Optimizing metacomputing with

communication-computation overlap. In PaCT ’01:

Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on

Parallel Computing Technologies, pages 190–204,

London, UK, 2001. Springer-Verlag.

[4]P. Beckman, K.Iskra, K. Yoshii, and S. Coghlan.

Operating system issues for petascale systems.

SIGOPS Operating System Review, 40(2):29–33, 2006.

[5]C. Bell, D. Bonachea, R. Nishtala, and K. Yelick.

Optimizing Bandwidth Limited Problems Using

One-Sided Communication and Overlap. In

Proceedings, 20th International Parallel and

Distributed Processing Symposium IPDPS 2006 (CAC

06), April 2006.

[6]R. Brightwell, R. Riesen, and K. D. Underwood.

Analyzing the impact of overlap, oﬄoad, and

independent progress for messagepassing interface

applications. Int. J. High Perform. Comput. Appl.,

19(2):103–117, 2005.

[7]E. D. Brooks.The Butterﬂy Barrier. International

Journal of Parallel Programming, 15(4):295–307, 1986.

[8]BZIP2. http://www.bzip.org, 2006.

[9]P.-Y. Calland, J. Dongarra, and Y. Robert. Tiling on

systems with communication/computation overlap.

Concurrency - Practice and Experience,

11(3):139–153, 1999.

[10]C. E. Cramer andJ. A. Board. Thedevelopment and

integration of a distributed 3d ﬀt for a cluster of

workstations. In Proceedings of the 4th Annual Linux

Showcase & Conference, Atlanta, volume 4. USENIX

Association, 2000.

[11]D. Culler, R. Karp, D. Patterson, A. Sahay, K. E.

Schauser, E. Santos, R. Subramonian, and T. von

Eicken. LogP: towards a realisticmodel of parallel

computation. In Principles Practice of Parallel

Programming, pages 1–12, 1993.

[12]A. Dubey andD. Tessera. Redistribution strategies for

portable parallel FFT: acase study. Concurrency and

Computation:Practice and Experience, 13(3):209–220,

[13]L. A. Estefanel and G. Mounie.Fast Tuning of

Intra-Cluster Collective Communications. In Recent

Advances in Parallel Virtual Machine and Message

Passing Interface: 11th EuropeanPVM/MPI Users

Group Meeting Budapest, Hungary, September19 - 22,

2004. Proceedings, 2004.

[14]E. Gabriel, G. E. Fagg, G. Bosilca, T. Angskun, J. J.

Dongarra, J. M. Squyres, V. Sahay, P. Kambadur,

B. Barrett, A. Lumsdaine, R. H. Castain, D. J.

Daniel, R. L. Graham, and T. S. Woodall. OpenMPI:

Goals, Concept, and Design of a Next Generation MPI

Implementation. In Proceedings, 11th European

PVM/MPI Users’ Group Meeting, Budapest,

Hungary, September 2004.

[15]W. D. Gropp and R. Thakur. Issues in developing a

thread-safe mpi implementation. In B. Mohr, J. L.

Tr¨

aﬀ, J. Worringen, and J. Dongarra, editors, Recent

Advances in Parallel Virtual Machine and Message

Passing Interface, 13th European PVM/MPI User’s

Group Meeting, Bonn, Germany, September 17-20,

2006, Proceedings, volume 4192 of Lecture Notes in

Computer Science, pages 12–21. Springer, 2006.

[16]T. Hoeﬂer, L.Cerquetti, T. Mehlan, F. Mietke, and

W. Rehm. A practical Approach to the Rating of

Barrier Algorithms using the LogP Model and Open

MPI. In Proceedings of the 2005 International

Conference on Parallel Processing Workshops

(ICPP’05), pages 562–569, June 2005.

[17]T. Hoeﬂer, P. Gottschling, W. Rehm, and

A. Lumsdaine. Optimizing a Conjugate Gradient

Solver with Non-Blocking Collective Operations. In

Recent Advantages in Parallel Virtual Machine and

Message Passing Interface. 13th European PVM/MPI

User’s Group Meeting, Proceedings, LNCS 4192, pages

374–382. Springer, 9 2006.

[18]T. Hoeﬂer andA. Lumsdaine. Design, Implementation,

and Usage of LibNBC. Technical report, Open

Systems Lab, Indiana University, 08 2006.

[19]T. Hoeﬂer, T. Mehlan, F. Mietke, and W. Rehm. Fast

Barrier Synchronization for InﬁniBand. In Proceedings,

20th International Parallel and Distributed Processing

Symposium IPDPS 2006 (CAC 06), April 2006.

[20]T. Hoeﬂer, J. Squyres, G. Bosilca, G. Fagg,

A. Lumsdaine, and W. Rehm. Non-Blocking Collective

Operations for MPI-2. Technical report, Open

Systems Lab, Indiana University, 08 2006.

[21]T. Hoeﬂer, J. Squyres, W. Rehm, and A. Lumsdaine.

A Case for Non-Blocking Collective Operations. In

Frontiers of High Performance Computing and

Networking - ISPA 2006 Workshops, volume

4331/2006, pages 155–164. Springer Berlin /

Heidelberg, 12 2006.

[22]T. Hoeﬂer, C. Viertel, T. Mehlan, F. Mietke, and

W. Rehm. Assessing Single-Message and Multi-Node

Communication Performance of InﬁniBand. In

Proceedings ofIEEE Inernational Conference on

Parallel Computing in Electrical Engineering,

PARELEC 2006, pages 227–232. IEEE Computer

Society, 9 2006.

[23]C. Iancu, P. Husbands, and P. Hargrove. Hunting the

overlap. In PACT ’05:Proceedings of the 14th

International Conference on Parallel Architectures and

Compilation Techniques (PACT’05), pages 279–290,

Washington,DC, USA, 2005. IEEEComputer Society.

[24]IBM. IBM Parallel

Environment for AIX, MPI SubroutineReference, 1993.

http://publibfp.boulder.ibm.com/epubs/pdf/a2274230.pdf.

[25]J. W. III and S. Bova. Where’s the Overlap? - An

Analysis of Popular MPI Implementations, 1999.

[26]Intel Corporation. Intel Application Notes - Using the

RDTSC Instruction for Performance Monitoring.

Technical report,Intel, 1997.

[27]K. Iskra, P. Beckman, K. Yoshii, and S. Coghlan. The

inﬂuence of operatingsystems on the performance of

collective operations at extreme scale. In Proceedings

of Cluster Computing, 2006 IEEE International

Conference, 2006.

[28]L. V. Kale, S. Kumar, and K. Vardarajan. A

Framework for Collective Personalized

Communication. In Proceedings of IPDPS’03, Nice,

France,April 2003.

[29]A. Kanevsky, A. Skjellum, and A. Rounbehler.

MPI/RT - an emerging standard for high-performance

real-time systems. In HICSS (3), pages 157–166, 1998.

[30]W. Lawry, C. Wilson, A. B. Maccabe, and

R. Brightwell.Comb:A portable benchmark suite for

assessing mpi overlap. In 2002 IEEE International

Conference on Cluster Computing (CLUSTER2002),

23-26 September2002, Chicago, IL, USA, pages

472–475. IEEE Computer Society, 2002.

[31]C. L. Lawson, R. J. Hanson, D. Kincaid, and F. T.

Krogh. Basic Linear Algebra Subprograms for

FORTRAN usage.In In ACM Trans. Math.Soft., 5

(1979), pp. 308-323, 1979.

[32]LibNBC. http://www.unixer.de/NBC, 2006.

[33]G. Liu and T. Abdelrahman.

Computation-communication overlap on

network-of-workstation multiprocessors. In Proc. of

the Int’l Conference on Parallel and Distributed

Processing Techniques and Applications, pages

1635–1642, July 1998.

[34]J. Liu, A. Mamidala, and D. Panda. Fast and Scalable

MPI-Level Broadcast using InﬁniBand’s Hardware

Multicast Support. Technical report,

OSU-CISRC-10/03-TR57, 2003.

[35]J. Liu, J. Wu, and D. K. Panda. High Performance

RDMA-Based MPI Implementation over InﬁniBand.

Int’l Journal of Parallel Programming, 2004, 2004.

[36]Message Passing Interface Forum. MPI-2Journal of

Development, July 1997.

[37]F. Mietke, R. Baumgartl, R. Rex, T. Mehlan,

T. Hoeﬂer, and W. Rehm. Analysis of the Memory

Registration Process in the Mellanox InﬁniBand

Software Stack. 8 2006.Accepted for publication at

Euro-Par 2006 Conference.

[38]Myrinet. http://www.myrinet.com, 2006.

[39]Quadrics. http://www.quadrics.com, 2006.

[40]R. Rabenseifner. Automatic MPI Counter Proﬁling. In

42nd CUG Conference, 2000.

[41]M. L. Scott and J. M. Mellor-Crummey. Fast,

contention-free combining treebarriers for

shared-memory multiprocessors. Int. J. Parallel

Program., 22(4):449–481, 1994.

[42]M. Technologies.Inﬁniband -industry standard data

center fabric is ready for prime time. Mellanox White

Papers, December 2005.

[43]S. S. Vadhiyar, G. E. Fagg, and J. Dongarra.

Automatically tuned collective communications. In

Supercomputing ’00:Proceedings of the 2000

ACM/IEEE conference on Supercomputing

(CDROM), page 3, Washington, DC,USA, 2000.

IEEE Computer Society.

[44]W. Yu, D. Buntinas, R. L. Graham, and D. K. Panda.

Eﬃcient and scalable barrier over quadrics and

myrinet with a new nic-based collective message

passing protocol. In 18th International Parallel and

Distributed ProcessingSymposium (IPDPS 2004),

CD-ROM / Abstracts Proceedings, 26-30 April 2004,

Santa Fe,New Mexico, USA, 2004.

... end if 18: h j,i ← z i+1 , v j , j = 0, 1, . . . , i 19: end for 20: y m ← argmin (H m+1,m y m − r 0 2 e 1 ) 2 21: x ← x 0 + V m y m It has been difficult to understand the performance of these solvers on existing machines, judge the impact of algorithmic tradeoffs, and predict performance on future architectures due to the lack of a coherent performance model [10]. For example, some runs in [5] exhibit a speedup of slightly more than a factor of 2, but this is difficult to explain in a deterministic model, as will be shown in Section 2. ...

... We will label the set of computations and waiting by the index k, which corresponds to the iteration number for the Krylov method. The removal of the global synchronizations will correspond to the introduction of split-phase collectives [10] for the norm calculation and orthogonalization step. A split-phase, or non-blocking, collective is a collective operation, such as a broadcast, which has been split into two parts so that it no longer requires a global synchronization p = 0 p = 1 Figure 1: Computation with P = 2 processes for K = 3 steps. ...

A Stochastic Performance Model for Pipelined Krylov Methods

Preprint

- Feb 2016
- Hannah Morgan
- Matthew Knepley
- Patrick Sanan
- Ridgway Scott

Pipelined Krylov methods seek to ameliorate the latency due to inner products necessary for projection by overlapping it with the computation associated with sparse matrix-vector multiplication. We clarify a folk theorem that this can only result in a speedup of 2×2\times over the naive implementation. Examining many repeated runs, we show that stochastic noise also contributes to the latency, and we model this using an analytical probability distribution. Our analysis shows that speedups greater than 2×2\times are possible with these algorithms.

View

Show abstract

... Communication costs are modeled using ring-style formulas for all-reduce, all-gather, and all-to-all collectives, with explicit startup latency and bandwidth terms following standard collective cost models (Thakur et al., 2005;Hoefler et al., 2007;Patarasuk & Yuan, 2009). Collective families include tensor parallel, KV-parallel, expert parallel, and layout-transition collectives. ...

The qs Inequality: Quantifying the Double Penalty of Mixture-of-Experts at Inference

Preprint

- Mar 2026
- Vignesh Adhinarayanan
- Nuwan Jayasena

Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models deliver high quality at low training FLOPs, but this efficiency often vanishes at inference. We identify a double penalty that structurally disadvantages MoE architectures during decoding: first, expert routing fragments microbatches and reduces weight reuse; second, massive resident expert pools reduce high-bandwidth memory (HBM) headroom for the KV cache. This phenomenon, formalized as reuse fragmentation, pushes feed-forward networks (FFNs) into a bandwidth-bound regime, especially at long context lengths. We introduce the qs inequality, a predictive criterion that identifies when MoE is structurally disadvantaged relative to a quality-matched dense model. This criterion unifies sparsity (s), the fraction of parameters activated per token, and the quality-equivalence factor (q), the size multiplier required for a dense model to match MoE performance. Our evaluation across frontier models including DeepSeek-V3, Qwen3-235B, Grok-1, and Switch-C demonstrates that this fragmentation is a general architectural phenomenon. For DeepSeek-V3 at 128k context, this results in a 4.5x throughput advantage for a quality-matched dense baseline. Crucially, massive architectures like Switch-C can become infeasible on cluster sizes where a quality-matched dense model remains viable. Our results suggest that training-time FLOP efficiency is an incomplete proxy for inference-time performance in long-context serving. They also indicate that MoE may be best viewed as a training-time optimization, with distillation into dense models as a possible path toward inference-efficient deployment.

View

Show abstract

... Considering the communication overhead in multi-node computing [44], we adopt the non-equal sequence distribution strategy, as proposed in Sect. . In this method, the master process processes more data compared to the other computing nodes. ...

Fast noisy long read alignment with multi-level parallelism

Article

Full-text available

- May 2025
- BMC BIOINFORMATICS
- Zeyu Xia
- Canqun Yang
- Chenchen Peng
- Yingbo Cui

Background
The advent of Single Molecule Real-Time (SMRT) sequencing has overcome many limitations of second-generation sequencing, such as limited read lengths, PCR amplification biases. However, longer reads increase data volume exponentially and high error rates make many existing alignment tools inapplicable. Additionally, a single CPU’s performance bottleneck restricts the effectiveness of alignment algorithms for SMRT sequencing.

Results
To address these challenges, we introduce ParaHAT, a parallel alignment algorithm for noisy long reads. ParaHAT utilizes vector-level, thread-level, process-level, and heterogeneous parallelism. We redesign the dynamic programming matrices layouts to eliminate data dependency in the base-level alignment, enabling effective vectorization. We further enhance computational speed through heterogeneous parallel technology and implement the algorithm for multi-node computing using MPI, overcoming the computational limits of a single node.

Conclusions
Performance evaluations show that ParaHAT got a 10.03x speedup in base-level alignment, with a parallel acceleration ratio and weak scalability metric of 94.61 and 98.98% on 128 nodes, respectively.

View

Show abstract

... Considering the communication overhead in multi-node computing [37], we adopt the non-equal sequence distribution strategy, as proposed in Section 3.2.2. In this method, the master process processes more data compared to the other computing nodes. ...

Fast Noisy Long Read Alignment with Multi-Level Parallelism

Preprint

Full-text available

- Oct 2024
- Zeyu Xia
- Canqun Yang
- Chenchen Peng
- Yingbo Cui

Background: The advent of Single Molecule Real-Time (SMRT) sequencing has overcome many limitations of second-generation sequencing, such as limited read lengths, PCR amplification biases. However, longer reads increase data volume exponentially and high error rates make many existing alignment tools inapplicable. Additionally, a single CPU's performance bottleneck restricts the effectiveness of alignment algorithms for SMRT sequencing. Methods: To address these challenges, we introduce ParaHAT, a parallel alignment algorithm for noisy long reads. ParaHAT utilizes vector-level, thread-level, process-level, and heterogeneous parallelism. We redesign the dynamic programming matrices layouts to eliminate data dependency in the base-level alignment, enabling effective vectorization. We further enhance computational speed through heterogeneous parallel technology and implement the algorithm for multi-node computing using MPI, overcoming the computational limits of a single node. Conclusion: Performance evaluations show that ParaHAT got a 5.39x speedup in base-level alignment, with a parallel acceleration ratio and weak scalability metric of 94.61 and 98.98% on 128 nodes, respectively.

View

Show abstract

Distributed Micro-Clustering of Streaming Text Data Using MPI on HPC Systems

Conference Paper

- Oct 2025
- Nathaniel C. Crossman
- Soon M. Chung

View

In-Network Collective Operations: Game Changer or Challenge for AI Workloads?

Article

- Jan 2026
- COMPUTER
- Torsten Hoefler
- Mikhail Khalilov
- Josiah Clark
- Amirreza Rastegari

This paper summarizes the opportunities of in-network collective operations for accelerated collective operations in artificial intelligence (AI) workloads. We provide sufficient detail to make this important field accessible to nonexperts in AI or networking, fostering a connection between these communities.

View

Show abstract

FMCC-RT: a scalable and fine-grained all-reduce algorithm for large-scale SMP clusters

Article

- Apr 2025
- Jintao Peng
- Jie Liu
- Jianbin Fang
- Jie Ren

All-reduce is a widely used communication technique for distributed and parallel applications typically implemented using either a tree-based or ring-based scheme. Each of these approaches has its own limitations: tree-based schemes struggle with efficiently exchanging large messages, while ring-based solutions assume constant communication throughput, an unrealistic expectation in modern network communication infrastructures. We present FMCC-RT, an all-reduce approach that combines the advantages of tree- and ring-based implementations while mitigating their drawbacks. FMCC-RT dynamically switches between tree and ring-based implementations depending on the size of the message being processed. It utilizes an analytical model to assess the impact of message sizes on the achieved throughput, enabling the derivation of optimal work partitioning parameters. Furthermore, FMCC-RT is designed with an OpenMPI-compatible API, requiring no modification to user code. We evaluated FMCC-RT through micro-benchmarks and real-world application tests. Experimental results show that FMCC-RT outperforms state-of-the-art tree- and ring-based methods, achieving speedups of up to 5.6×.

View

Show abstract

Evaluating Communication Pattern Representations in Execution Trace Gantt Charts

Conference Paper

- Oct 2024
- Connor Scully-Allison
- Katherine E. Isaacs

View

HammingMesh: A Network Topology for Large-Scale Deep Learning

Article

- Nov 2024
- COMMUN ACM
- Torsten Hoefler
- Tommaso Bonoto
- Daniele De Sensi
- Steve Scott

Numerous microarchitectural optimizations unlocked tremendous processing power for deep neural networks that in turn fueled the ongoing AI revolution. With the exhaustion of such optimizations, the growth of modern AI is now gated by the performance of training systems, especially their data movement. Instead of focusing on single accelerators, we investigate data-movement characteristics of large-scale training at full system scale. Based on our workload analysis, we design HammingMesh, a novel network topology that provides high bandwidth at low cost with high job scheduling flexibility. Specifically, HammingMesh can support full bandwidth and isolation to deep learning training jobs with two dimensions of parallelism. Furthermore, it also supports high global bandwidth for generic traffic. Thus, HammingMesh will power future large-scale deep learning systems with extreme bandwidth requirements.

View

Show abstract

Ray Decomposition Radiation Transport for High Performance Computing

Article

- Nov 2024
- J COMPUT PHYS
- Owen Mylotte
- Matthew McGurn
- Kenneth Budzinski
- Paul E. DesJardin

View

Show more

LogP: towards a realistic model of parallel computation

Conference Paper

Full-text available

- May 1993
- David E. Culler
- Richard Manning Karp
- David Patterson
- Thorsten von Eicken

View

Design, Implementation, and Usage of LibNBC

Article

Full-text available

- Jan 2006
- Torsten Hoefler
- Andrew Lumsdaine

We describe the design and implementation of LibNBC a library that implements non- blocking collective operations. Its main goals are high portability and high performance. The library is written in ANSI C on top of MPI-1. This document describes the internal design, implementation and various internal and external programming interfaces of LibNBC.

View

Show abstract

Non-Blocking Collective Operations for MPI2

Article

Full-text available

- Torsten Hoefler
- Jeffrey M. Squyres
- George Bosilca
- Wolfgang Rehm

We propose new non-blocking interfaces for the collective group communication functions defined in MPI-1 and MPI-2. This document is meant as a standard extension and written in the same way as the MPI standards. It covers the MPI-API as well as the semantics of the new operations.

View

Show abstract

Analyzing the Impact of Overlap, Offload, and Independent Progress for Message Passing Interface Applications

Article

- May 2005
- INT J HIGH PERFORM C
- Ron Brightwell

The overlap of computation and communication has long been considered to be a significant performance benefit for applications. Similarly, the ability of the Message Passing Interface (MPI) to make independent progress (that is, to make progress on outstanding communication operations while not in the MPI library) is also believed to yield performance benefits. Using an intelligent network interface to offload the work required to support overlap and independent progress is thought to be an ideal solution, but the benefits of this approach have not been studied in depth at the application level. This lack of analysis is complicated by the fact that most MPI implementations do not sufficiently support overlap or independent progress. Recent work has demonstrated a quantifiable advantage for an MPI implementation that uses offload to provide overlap and independent progress. The study is conducted on two different platforms with each having two MPI implementations (one with and one without independent progress). Thus, identical network hardware and virtually identical software stacks are used. Furthermore, one platform, ASCI Red, allows further separation of features such as overlap and offload. Thus, this paper extends previous work by further qualifying the source of the performance advantage: offload, overlap, or independent progress.

View

Show abstract

Overlap of Computation and Communication on Shared-Memory Networks-of-Workstations

Article

- Tarek S. Abdelrahman
- Gary Liu

This paper describes and evaluates a compiler transformation that improves the perfor-mance of parallel programs on Network-of-Workstation (NOW) shared-memory multi-processors. The transformation overlaps the communication time resulting form non-local memory accesses with the computation time in parallel loops to eeectively hide the latency of the remote accesses. The transformation peels from a parallel loop iterations that access remote data and re-schedules them after the execution of iterations that access only local data (local-only iterations). Asynchronous prefetching of remote data is used to overlap non-local access latency with the execution of local-only iterations. Experimental evaluation of the transformation on a NOW m ultiprocessor indicates that it is generally eeective i n i m p r o ving parallel execution time (up to 1.9 times). The ex-tent of the beneet is determined by three factors: the size of local-only computations, the signiicance of remote memory access latency, and the position of the iterations that access remote data in a parallel loop.

View

Show abstract

Recent Advances in Parallel Virtual Machine and Message Passing Interface, 13th European PVM/MPI User's Group Meeting

Conference Paper

- Sep 2006
- Bernd Mohr
- Jesper Larsson Träff
- Joachim Worringen
- Jack Dongarra

View

Computation-Communication Overlap on Network-of-Workstation Multiprocessors

Article

- Jan 1998
- Gary Liu
- Tarek S. Abdelrahman

This paper describes and evaluates a compiler trans- formation that improves the performance of parallel programs on Network-of-Workstation (NOW) shared- memory multiprocessors. The transformation overlaps the communication time resulting form non-local mem- ory accesses with the computation time in parallel loops to effectively hide the latency of the remote accesses. The transformation peels from a parallel loop iterations that access remote data and re-schedules them after the ex- ecution of iterations that access only local data (local- only iterations). Asynchronous prefetching of remote data is used to overlap non-local access latency with the execution of local-only iterations. Experimental eval- uation of the transformation on a NOW multiprocessor indicates that it is generally effective in improving par- allel execution time (up to 1.9 times). The extent of the benefit is determined by three factors: the size of local- only computations, the significance of remote memory access latency, and the position of the iterations that access remote data in a parallel loop.

View

Show abstract

The Development and Integration of a Distributed 3D FFT for a Cluster of Workstations

Article

- Jan 2000
- Christopher Eric Cramer
- J. A. Board

View

Recent Advances in Parallel Virtual Machine and Message Passing Interface, 13th European PVM/MPI User's Group Meeting, Bonn, Germany, September 17-20, 2006, Proceedings

Article

- Jan 2006
- Bernd Mohr
- Jesper Larsson Träff
- Joachim Worringen
- Jack Dongarra

View

Fast Barrier Synchronization for InfiniBandTM

Article

- Jan 2006
- Torsten Hoefler
- Torsten Mehlan
- Frank Mietke
- Wolfgang Rehm

The MPI Barrier() call can be crucial for several ap- plications and has been target of different optimizations since several decades. The best solution to the barrier problem scales with O(log2N ) and uses the dissemina- tion principle. A new method using an enhanced dis- semination principle and inherent network parallelism will be demonstrated in this paper. The new approach was able to speedup the barrier performance by 40% in relation to the best published algorithm. It is shown that it is possible to leverage the inherent hardware par- allelism inside the InfiniBandTM network to lower the latency of the MPI Barrier() operation without addi- tional costs. The principle of sending multiple mes- sages in (pseudo-) parallel can be implemented into a well known algorithm to decrease the number of rounds and speed the overall operation up.

View

Show abstract

Show more